

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY HYDERABAD 
B.Tech. in CSE (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE & MACHINE LEARNING) 
Course Structure & Syllabus (R-25 Regulations) 
Applicable from AY 2025-2026 Batch 
 
I Year I Semester 
S.No. 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.      MA101BS Matrices and Calculus 3   1 0 4 
2.      PH102BS Advanced Engineering Physics 3   0 0 3 
3.      CS103ES Programming for Problem Solving 3   0 0 3 
4.      EE104ES Basic Electrical Engineering 3   0 0 3 
5.      ME105ES Engineering Drawing and Computer Aided Drafting 2   0 2 3 
6.      PH106BS    Advanced Engineering Physics Lab 0   0 2 1 
7.      CS107ES    Programming for Problem Solving Lab 0   0 2 1 
8.      EE108ES    Basic Electrical Engineering Lab 0   0 2 1 
9.      CS109ES    IT Workshop 0   0 2 1 
10.   Induction Program           
  Total Credits 14   1 10    20 
 
I Year II Semester  
S.No. 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.      MA201BS Ordinary Differential Equations and Vector Calculus     3   0 0 3 
2.      CH202BS Engineering Chemistry 3   0 0 3 
3.      CS203ES Data Structures 3   0 0 3 
4.      EC204ES Electronic Devices and Circuits 3   0 0 3 
5.      EN205HS English for Skill Enhancement 3   0 0 3 
6.      CH206BS    Engineering Chemistry Lab 0   0 2 1 
7.      CS207ES    Data Structures Lab  0   0 2 1 
8.      EN208HS    English Language and Communication Skills Lab 0   0 2 1 
9.      ME209ES    Engineering Workshop 0   0 2 1 
10.     CS210ES    Python Programming Lab 0   0 2 1 
  Total Credits 15   0 10    20 
 
II YEAR I SEMESTER 
S.No. 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.      MA401BS Mathematical and Statistical Foundations 3   0 0 3 
2.      CS302PC    Computer Organization and Architecture  3   0 0 3 
3.      CS303PC    Object Oriented Programming through java 3   0 0 3 
4.      CS304PC    Software Engineering  3   0 0 3 
5.      CS305PC    Database Management System 3   0 0 3 
6.      MA306PC    Computational Mathematics Lab 0   0 2 1 
7.      CS307PC    Object Oriented Programming through Java Lab 0   0 2 1 
8.      CS308PC    Software Engineering Lab  0   0 2 1 
9.      CS309PC    Database Management Systems Lab 0   0 2 1 
10.     CS310SD    Node JS/React JS/Django 0   0 2 1 
  Total Credits 15   0 10    20 
 
 
 
 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
II YEAR II SEMESTER 
S.No. 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.      CS401PC    Discrete Mathematics 3    0   0 3 
2.      CS402PC    Operating Systems  3    0   0 3 
3.      CS403PC    Algorithms Design and Analysis 3    0   0 3 
4.      CS404PC    Computer Networks 3    0   0 3 
5.      CS405PC    Machine Learning  3    0   0 3 
6.      MS406HS    Innovation and Entrepreneurship 2    0   0 2 
7.      CS407PC    Operating Systems Lab 0    0   2 1 
8.      CS408PC    Computer Networks lab 0    0   2 1 
9.      CS409PC    Machine Learning Lab 0    0   2 1 
10.     CS410SD    Data Visualization- R Programming/ Power BI 0    0   2 1 
11.     VA400HS    Indian Knowledge System 
1    0   0 1 
  Total Credits 18   0  08    22 
 
III YEAR I SEMESTER 
S.No. 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.       AI501PC    Artificial Intelligence 3   0 0 3 
2.       AI502PC    Automata theory and Compiler Design 3   0 0 3 
3.       AI503PC    Data Analytics and Visualization 3   0 0 3 
4.    Professional Elective-I 3   0 0 3 
5.    Open Elective-I 2   0 0 2 
6.       AI504PC    Artificial Intelligence Lab 0   0 2 1 
7.       AI505PC    Compiler Design Lab 0   0 2 1 
8.       AI506PC    Data Analytics and Visualization Lab 0   0 2 1 
9.       AI507PC    Field Based Research Project 0   0 4 2 
10.      AI508SD    UI Design –Flutter/ Android Studio 0   0 2 1 
11.  
VA500HS/ 
VA501HS 
Gender Sensitization*/ Human Values and 
Professional Ethics* 
1   0 0    0.5+0.5 
  Total Credits 15   0 10    21 
 
*Note: For the courses Gender Sensitization and Human Values and Professional Ethics - one 
hour of instruction will be conducted on alternate weeks. For example, if a one-hour class for Gender 
Sensitization is conducted this week, then a one-hour class for Human Values and Professional Ethics 
will be conducted in the following week. 
 
III YEAR II SEMESTER 
S.No 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.  AI601PC    Natural Language Processing 3    0   0 3 
2.  AI602PC    Deep Learning 3    0   0 3 
3.  MS603HS   Business Economics and Financial Analysis 3    0   0 3 
4.   Professional Elective-II 3    0   0 3 
5.   Open Elective – II  2    0   0 2 
6.  AI604PC    Natural Language Processing Lab 0    0   2 1 
7.  AI605PC    Deep Learning Lab 0    0   2 1 
8.  AI606PC    Chatbots Lab 0    0   2 1 
9.  EN607HS    English for Employability Skills Lab 0    0   2 1 
10.  AI608SD    Prompt Engineering 0    0   2 1 
11.  VA600ES    Environmental Science 1    0   0 1 
  Total Credits 15   0  10    20 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
IV YEAR I SEMESTER 
S. No. 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.  AI701PC    Reinforcement Learning 3    0   0 3 
2.  AI702PC    Generative AI  3    0   0 3 
3.  MS703HS    Fundamentals of Management for Engineers 3   0   0 3 
4.   Professional Elective-III 3    0   0 3 
5.   Professional Elective – IV  3    0   0 3 
6.   Open Elective – III 2    0   0 2 
7.  AI704PC    Reinforcement Learning Lab  0    0   2 1 
8.  AI705PC    Generative AI Lab 0    0   2 1 
9.  AI706PC    Industry Oriented Mini Project/ Internship 0    0   4 2 
  Total Credits 17   0  08    21 
 
IV YEAR II SEMESTER 
S. No. 
Course 
Code 
Course Title L T P Credits 
1.   Professional Elective – V  3    0   0 3 
2.   Professional Elective – VI  3    0   0 3 
3.  AI801PC    Project Work 0    0   42     14 
  Total Credits 6   0  42    20 
 
 
PROFESSIONAL ELECTIVES 
Professional Elective - I  
CS511PE 
Computer Graphics 
CS512PE 
Introduction to Data Science 
CS513PE 
Software Testing Methodologies 
CS514PE 
Data Mining 
CS515PE 
Web Programming 
CS516PE 
Distributed Systems 
 
Professional Elective - II 
CS621PE 
Image Processing 
CS622PE 
Blockchain Technology 
CS623PE 
Software Project Management 
CS624PE 
Mining Massive Datasets 
CS625PE 
Full Stack Development 
CS626PE 
DevOps 
 
Professional Elective-III 
CS731PE 
Computer Vision 
CS732PE 
Cryptography and Network Security 
CS733PE 
Penetration Testing and Incident Response 
CS734PE 
Data Stream Mining 
CS735PE 
Cloud Computing 
CS736PE 
Information Retrieval Systems 
 
Professional Elective-IV 
CS741PE 
Augmented Reality & Virtual Reality 
CS742PE 
Agile Methodology 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS743PE 
Big Data Technologies 
CS744PE 
Quantum Computing 
CS745PE 
Robotic Process Automation 
CS746PE 
Cyber Forensics 
 
Professional Elective-V 
CS851PE 
Social Media Mining 
CS852PE 
Nature Inspired Computing 
CS853PE 
Internet of Things 
CS854PE 
Game Theory 
CS855PE 
Mobile Application Development 
CS856PE 
Human Computer Interaction 
 
Professional Elective-VI 
CS861PE 
High Performance Computing 
CS862PE 
Edge Computing 
CS863PE 
Graph Theory 
CS864PE 
Adhoc & Sensor Networks 
CS865PE 
Sustainable Engineering 
CS866PE 
Distributed Databases 
 
OPEN ELECTIVES 
Open Elective I: 
1.  AI511OE: Fundamentals of AI 
2.  AI512OE: Machine Learning Basics   
 
Open Elective II: 
1.  AI621OE: Introduction to Natural Language Processing 
2.  AI622OE: AI applications 
 
Open Elective III: 
1.  AI731OE: Chatbots 
2.  AI732OE: Computer Vision with Open CV 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
MA101BS: MATRICES AND CALCULUS 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.        L   T   P   C 
                                                           3   1   0    4 
Pre-requisites: Mathematical Knowledge at pre-university level 
 
Objectives: To learn 
1.  Applying basic operations on matrices and their properties. 
2.  Concept of a rank of the matrix and applying this concept to know the consistency and solving 
the system of linear equations. 
3.  Concept of eigen values and eigen vectors and to reduce the quadratic form to canonical form 
4.  Geometrical approach to the mean value theorems and their application to the mathematical 
problems 
5.  Finding maxima and minima of functions of two and three variables. 
6. Evaluation of multiple integrals and their applications. 
 
Course outcomes: After learning the contents of this paper, the student must be able to 
1.  Write the matrix representation of a set of linear equations and to analyze the solution of the 
system of equations 
2.  Find the Eigen values and Eigen vectors  
3.  Reduce the quadratic form to canonical form using orthogonal transformations. 
4.  Solve the applications of the mean value theorems. 
5.  Find the extreme values of functions of two variables with/ without constraints. 
6.  Evaluate the multiple integrals and apply the concept to find areas, volumes. 
 
UNIT-I: Matrices               8 L 
Rank of a matrix by Echelon form and Normal form – Inverse of Non-singular matrices by Gauss-Jordan 
method.  System  of  linear  equations:  Solving  system  of  Homogeneous  and  Non-Homogeneous 
equations. Gauss Seidel Iteration Method. 
 
UNIT-II: Eigen values and Eigen vectors                      10 L 
Linear  Transformation  and  Orthogonal  Transformation:  Eigen  values  – Eigen  vectors  and  their 
properties – Diagonalization of a matrix – Cayley-Hamilton Theorem (without proof) – Fnding inverse 
and power of a matrix by Cayley-Hamilton Theorem. Quadratic forms and Nature of the Quadratic 
Forms – Reduction of Quadratic form to canonical form by Orthogonal Transformation.  
 
UNIT-III: Single Variable Calculus                      10 L 
Limit  and  Continuous  of  functions  and  its  properties.  Mean  value  theorems:  Rolle’s  theorem  – 
Lagrange’s  Mean  value  theorem with  their  Geometrical  Interpretation  and  applications  –  Cauchy’s 
Mean value Theorem – Taylor’s Series (All the theorems without proof). 
Curve Tracing: Curve tracing in cartesian coordinates. 
 
UNIT-IV: Multivariable Calculus (Partial Differentiation and applications)                 10 L 
Definitions of Limit and continuity – Partial Differentiation: Euler’s Theorem – Total derivative – Jacobian 
–  Functional  dependence  &  independence. Applications:  Maxima  and  minima  of  functions  of  two 
variables and three variables using method of Lagrange multipliers. 
 
UNIT-V: Multivariable Calculus (Integration)                   10 L 
Evaluation of Double Integrals (Cartesian and polar coordinates) – change of order of integration (only 
Cartesian form) – Change of variables for double integrals (Cartesian to polar). Evaluation of Triple 
Integrals  –  Change  of  variables  for  triple  integrals  (Cartesian  to  Spherical  and  Cylindrical  polar 
coordinates). Applications: Areas by double integrals and volumes by triple integrals. 
 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. B.S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publishers, 36
th
 Edition, 2010. 
2. R.K. Jain and S.R.K. Iyengar, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Narosa Publications, 5
th
 
Editon, 2016. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9
th
 Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
2. G.B. Thomas and R.L. Finney, Calculus and Analytic geometry, 9
th
Edition, Pearson, Reprint, 
2002. 
3. N.P.  Bali and  Manish  Goyal, A  text  book  of  Engineering  Mathematics,  Laxmi  Publications, 
Reprint, 2008. 
4. H. K. Dass and Er. Rajnish Verma, Higher Engineering Mathematics, S Chand and Company 
Limited, New Delhi. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
PH102BS: ADVANCED ENGINEERING PHYSICS 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Pre-requisites: 10+2 Physics 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To study crystal structures, defects, and material characterization techniques like XRD and 
SEM. 
2.  To understand fundamental concepts of quantum mechanics and their applications in solids 
and nanomaterials. 
3.  To introduce quantum computing principles, quantum gates, and basic quantum algorithms. 
4.  To learn the properties and applications of magnetic and dielectric materials. 
5.  To explore the working and applications of lasers and fibre optics in modern technology. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. CO1:  Analyze crystal structures, identify  defects, and apply XRD and SEM techniques for 
material characterization. 
2. CO2:  Apply  quantum mechanical principles to  explain particle behaviour and energy  band 
formation in solids. 
3. CO3:  Understand  quantum  computing  concepts,  use  quantum  gates,  and  explain  basic 
quantum algorithms. 
4. CO4: Classify magnetic and dielectric materials and explain their properties, synthesis, and 
applications. 
5. CO5: Explain the principles of lasers and fibre optics and their applications in communication 
and sensing. 
 
UNIT - I: Crystallography & Materials Characterization     
Introduction:  Unit  cell,  space  lattice,  basis,  lattice  parameters;  crystal  structures,  Bravais  lattices, 
packing factor: SC, BCC, FCC; Miller indices, inter-planar distance; defects in crystals (Qualitative): 
point defects, line defects, surface defects and volume defects. concept of nanomaterials: surface to 
volume ratio, X -ray diffraction: Bragg’s law, powder method, calculation of average crystallite size using 
Debye Scherrer’s formula, scanning electron microscopy (SEM): block diagram, working principle. 
 
UNIT - II: Quantum Mechanics               
Introduction, de-Broglie hypothesis, Heisenberg uncertainty principle,  physical significance of wave 
function, postulates of quantum mechanics: operators in quantum mechanics, eigen values and eigen 
functions, expectation value; Schrödinger’s time independent  wave equation, particle in a 1D box, 
Bloch’s  theorem  (qualitative),  Kronig-Penney  model  (qualitative):  E-k  diagram,  effective  mass  of 
electron, formation of energy bands, origin of bandgap, classification of solids, concept of discrete 
energy levels and quantum confinement in nanomaterials. 
 
UNIT - III: Quantum Computing        
Introduction, linear algebra for quantum computation, Dirac’s Bra and Ket notation and their properties, 
Hilbert  space,  Bloch’s  sphere,  concept  of  quantum computer,  classical bits,  Qubits,  multiple  Qubit 
system,  quantum  computing  system  for  information  processing,  evolution  of  quantum  systems, 
quantum  measurements,  entanglement,  quantum  gates,  challenges  and  advantages  of  quantum 
computing over classical computation, quantum algorithms: Deutsch-Jozsa, Shor, Grover. 
 
UNIT - IV: Magnetic and Dielectric Materials                              
Introduction to magnetic  materials, origin of magnetic moment-classification of magnetic materials, 
hysteresis, Weiss domain theory of ferromagnetism, soft and hard magnetic materials, synthesis of 
ferrimagnetic materials using sol-gel method, applications: magnetic hyperthermia for cancer treatment, 
magnets for EV, Giant Magneto Resistance (GMR) device. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Introduction to dielectric materials, types of polarization (qualitative): electronics, ionic & orientation; 
ferroelectric, piezoelectric, pyroelectric materials and their applications: Ferroelectric Random-Access 
Memory (Fe-RAM), load cell and fire sensor. 
 
UNIT - V: Laser and Fibre Optics             
Introduction to laser, characteristics of laser, Einstein coefficients and their relations, metastable state, 
population inversion, pumping, lasing action, Ruby laser, He-Ne laser, CO
2
 laser, semiconductor diode 
laser, applications: Bar code scanner, LIDAR for autonomous vehicle. 
Introduction to  fibre  optics,  total  internal  reflection, construction  of  optical  fibre,  acceptance  angle, 
numerical aperture, classification of optical fibres, losses in optical fibre, applications: optical fibre for 
communication system, sensor for structural health monitoring. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Walter Borchardt-Ott, Crystallography: An Introduction, Springer. 
2.  Charles Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3.  Thomas G. Wong, Introduction to Classical and Quantum Computing, Rooted Grove 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Jozef Gruska, Quantum Computing, McGraw Hill 
2.  Michael  A.  Nielsen  &  Isaac  L.  Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 
Cambridge University Press. 
3.  John M. Senior, Optical Fiber Communications Principles and Practice, Pearson Education 
Limited. 
 
Useful Links 
 https://shijuinpallotti.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/optical-fiber-
communications-principles-and-pr.pdf  
 https://www.geokniga.org/bookfiles/geokniga-crystallography_0.pdf   
 https://dpbck.ac.in/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Introduction-to-Solid-State-PhysicsCharles-
Kittel.pdf  
 https://www.thomaswong.net/introduction-to-classical-and-quantum-computing-1e4p.pdf    
 https://www.fi.muni.cz/usr/gruska/qbook1.pdf  
 https://profmcruz.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/quantum-computation-and-
quantum-information-nielsen-chuang.pdf  
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS103ES: PROGRAMMING FOR PROBLEM SOLVING 
  
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To learn the fundamentals of computers. 
2.  To understand the various steps in program development. 
3.  To learn the syntax and semantics of the C programming language. 
4.  To learn the usage of structured programming approaches in solving problems. 
 
Course Outcomes: The student will learn 
1.  To write algorithms and to draw flowcharts for solving problems. 
2.  To convert the algorithms/flowcharts to C programs. 
3.  To code and test a given logic in the C programming language. 
4.  To decompose a problem into functions and to develop modular reusable code. 
5.  To use arrays, pointers, strings and structures to write C programs. 
6.  Searching and sorting problems. 
 
UNIT - I: Overview of C:C Language Elements, Variable Declarations and Data Types, Executable 
Statements, General Form of a C Program, Arithmetic Expressions, Formatting Numbers in Program 
Output. 
Selection  Structures:  Control  Structures,  Conditions,  if  Statement,  if  Statements  with  Compound 
Statements, Decision Steps in Algorithms. 
Repetition and Loop Statements: Repetition in Programs, Counting Loops and the while Statement, 
Computing a Sum or Product in a Loop, for Statement, Conditional Loops, Loop Design, Nested Loops, 
do-while Statement. 
 
UNIT - II:  Top-Down  Design  with  Functions:  Building  Programs  from  Existing  Information,  Library 
Functions, Top-Down Design and Structure Charts, Functions without Arguments, Functions with Input 
Arguments. 
Pointers  and  Modular  Programming:  Pointers  and  the  Indirection  Operator,  Functions  with  Output 
Parameters, Multiple Calls to  a Function  with Input/  Output Parameters, Scope of Names, Formal 
Output Parameters as Actual Arguments. 
 
UNIT - III: Arrays: Declaring and Referencing Arrays, Array Subscripts, Using for Loops for Sequential 
Access, Using Array Elements as Function Arguments, Array Arguments, Searching and Sorting an 
Array, Parallel Arrays and Enumerated Types, Multidimensional Arrays. 
Strings:  String  Basics,  String  Library  Functions:  Assignment  and  Substrings,  Longer  Strings: 
Concatenation and Whole-Line Input, String Comparison, Arrays of Pointers. 
 
UNIT - IV: Recursion: The Nature of Recursion, Tracing a Recursive Function, Recursive Mathematical 
Functions, Recursive Functions with Array and String Parameters 
Structure and Union Types: User-Defined Structure Types, Structure Type Data as Input and Output 
Parameters, Functions with Structured Result Values, Union Types. 
 
UNIT - V: Text and Binary File Pointers: Input/ Output Files - Review and Further Study, Binary Files, 
Searching a Database. 
Searching and Sorting: Basic searching in an array of elements (linear and binary search techniques), 
Basic algorithms to sort array of elements (Bubble, Insertion and Selection sort algorithms). 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Jeri R. Hanly and Elliot B. Koffman, Problem solving and Program Design in C 7th Edition, 
Pearson. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
2.  B.A. Forouzan and R.F. Gilberg C Programming and Data Structures, Cengage Learning, 
(3rd Edition). 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, Prentice Hall of 
India. 
2.  E. Balagurusamy, Computer fundamentals and C, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill. 
3.  Yashavant Kanetkar, Let Us C, 18th Edition, BPB. 
4.  R.G. Dromey, How to solve it by Computer, Pearson (16th Impression). 
5.  Programming in C, Stephen G. Kochan, Fourth Edition, Pearson Education. 
6.  Herbert Schildt, C: The Complete Reference, Mc Graw Hill, 4th Edition. 
7.  Byron Gottfried, Schaum’s Outline of Programming with C, McGraw-Hill. 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
EE104ES: BASIC ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.                      L    T    P    C 
                       3     0    0    3 
Prerequisites: Mathematics  
Course Objectives: 
   To understand DC and Single & Three phase AC circuits   
   To study and understand the different types of DC, AC machines and Transformers. 
   To import the knowledge of various electrical installations and the concept of power, power 
factor and its improvement. 
 
Course Outcomes: After learning the contents of this paper the student must be able to  
   Understand and analyze basic Electrical circuits 
   Study the working principles of Electrical Machines and Transformers 
   Introduce components of Low Voltage Electrical Installations. 
 
Course 
Objectives 
Program Outcomes 
  PO1  PO2  PO3  PO4  PO5  PO6  PO7  PO8  PO9  PO10  PO11  PO12 
To   understand 
DC and Single & 
Three  phase  AC 
circuits. 
3 2 1  2 0 0 1 2 0 1 2 
To   study   and 
understand   the 
different  types  of 
DC, AC machines 
and 
Transformers. 
3 2 1 1 3 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 
To   import   the 
knowledge    of 
various  electrical 
installations  and 
the  concept  of 
power,    power 
factor   and   its 
improvement. 
3 2 0  3 0 0 0 1 2 1 1 
 
Course 
Outcomes 
Program Outcomes 
   
PO1 
PO2  PO3  PO4  PO5  PO6  PO7  PO8  PO9  PO10  PO11  PO12 
Understand  and 
analyse    basic 
Electrical circuits 
3 2 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 2 2 
Study the working 
principles of 
Electrical 
Machines    and 
Transformers 
3 2 1 0 3 1 0 1 1 2 1 2 
Introduce 
components   of 
Low Voltage 
Electrical 
Installations. 
3 2 1 1 3 2 0 0 1 0 2 2 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
 
UNIT-I:  
D.C. Circuits: Electrical circuit elements (R, L and C), voltage and current sources, KVL&KCL, analysis 
of  simple  circuits  with  dc  excitation.  Superposition,  Thevenin  and  Norton  Theorems.  Time-domain 
analysis of first-order RL and RC circuits.  
 
UNIT-II:  
A.C. Circuits: Representation of sinusoidal waveforms, peak and rms values, phasor representation, 
real  power,  reactive  power,  apparent  power,  power  factor,  Analysis  of  single-phase  ac  circuits 
consisting of R, L, C, RL, RC, RLC combinations (series and parallel), resonance in series R-L-C circuit. 
Three-phase balanced circuits, voltage and current relations in star and delta connections. 
  
UNIT-III:  
Transformers: Ideal and practical transformer, equivalent circuit, losses in transformers, regulation and 
efficiency. Auto-transformer and three-phase transformer connections.  
 
UNIT-IV:  
Electrical Machines: Construction and working principle of dc machine, performance characteristics 
of dc shunt machine. Generation of rotating magnetic field, Construction and working of a three-phase 
induction motor, Significance of torque-slip characteristics. Single-phase induction motor, Construction 
and working. Construction and working of synchronous generator.  
 
UNIT-V:  
Electrical Installations: Components of LT Switchgear: Switch Fuse Unit (SFU), MCB, ELCB, MCCB, 
Types  of  Wires  and  Cables,  Earthing.  Types  of  Batteries,  Important  Characteristics  for  Batteries. 
Elementary calculations for energy consumption, power factor improvement and battery backup. 
  
TEXT BOOKS:  
1.  D.P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 4
th
 Edition, 
2019.  
2.  MS Naidu and S Kamakshaiah, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2
nd
 Edition, 
2008.  
 
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1.  P. Ramana, M. Suryakalavathi, G.T. Chandrasheker, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, S. Chand, 
2
nd
 Edition, 2019. 
2.  D. C. Kulshreshtha, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, McGraw Hill, 2009 
3.  M.  S.  Sukhija,  T.  K.  Nagsarkar,  “Basic  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineering”,  Oxford,  1
st
 
Edition, 2012. 
4.  Abhijit  Chakrabarthi,  Sudipta  Debnath,  Chandan  Kumar  Chanda,  “Basic  Electrical 
Engineering”, 2
nd
 Edition, McGraw Hill, 2021. 
5.  L. S. Bobrow, “Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering”, Oxford University Press, 2011.  
6.  E. Hughes, “Electrical and Electronics Technology”, Pearson, 2010.  
7.  V. D. Toro, “Electrical Engineering Fundamentals”, Prentice Hall India, 1989 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
ME105ES: ENGINEERING DRAWING AND COMPUTER AIDED DRAFTING 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
2    0    2   3 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To introduce the fundamentals of engineering drawing and projection systems. 
2.  To develop skills in constructing orthographic, isometric, and sectional views. 
3.  To train students in interpreting and creating technical drawings using CAD tools. 
4.  To familiarize students with dimensioning standards and drafting conventions. 
5.  To bridge manual drafting techniques with computer-aided drafting practices. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student will be able to: 
1.  Understand and apply the principles of orthographic and isometric projections. 
2.  Create sectional views and dimensioned drawings using BIS standards. 
3.  Use CAD software to generate 2D engineering drawings. 
4.  Visualize and construct solid models from 2D views. 
5.  Interpret and produce engineering drawings of mechanical components and assemblies. 
6.  Demonstrate drafting skills for practical and industrial applications. 
 
UNIT – I: Introduction to Engineering Graphics (Conventional) 
Principles of Engineering Graphics and their Significance, Geometrical Constructions, Scales, Plain and 
Diagonal,  Conic  Sections  including  the  Rectangular  Hyperbola,  General  method  only.  Cycloid, 
Epicycloid and Hypocycloid. 
 
UNIT - II: Orthographic Projections (Conventional and Computer Aided) 
Principles of Orthographic Projections, Conventions, Projections of Points and Lines, Projections of 
Plane regular geometric figures. Auxiliary Planes. Computer aided orthographic projections, points, 
lines and planes. Introduction to Computer aided drafting, views, commands and conics. 
 
UNIT – III: Projections of Regular Solids (Conventional and Computer Aided) 
Auxiliary Views, Sections or Sectional views of Right Regular Solids, Prism, Cylinder, Pyramid, Cone, 
Auxiliary views, Computer aided projections of solids, sectional views  
 
UNIT – IV: Development of Surfaces (Conventional): Prism, Cylinder, Pyramid and Cone. 
 
UNIT – V: Isometric Projections (Conventional and Computer Aided) 
Principles of Isometric Projection, Isometric Scale, Isometric Views, Conventions, Isometric Views of 
Lines,  Plane  Figures,  Simple  and  Compound  Solids,  Isometric  Projection  of  objects  having  non, 
isometric lines. Isometric Projection of Spherical Parts. Conversion of Isometric Views to Orthographic 
Views and Vice- versa, Conventions. Conversion of orthographic projection into isometric view. 
 
Note:  
1.  The End Semester Examination will be in conventional mode. 
2.  CIE – I will be in conventional mode. 
3.  CIE – II will be using Computer. 
 
TEXT BOOKS:  
1.  Engineering Drawing, N.D. Bhatt, Charotar, 54
th
 Edition, 2023. 
2.  Engineering Drawing and graphics Using AutoCAD, T. Jeyapoovan and Vikas, S. Chand and 
company Ltd., 3
rd
 Edition, 2010. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Engineering Drawing, Basant Agrawal and C.M. Agrawal, McGraw Hill, 3
rd
 Edition, 2019. 
2.  Engineering Graphics and Design, WILEY, John Wiley and Sons Inc, 3
rd
 Edition, 2020. 
3.  Engineering Drawing, M. B. Shah and B.C. Rane, Pearson, 2
nd
 Edition, 2009. 
4.  Engineering Drawing, N. S. Parthasarathy and Vela Murali, Oxford, 1
st
 Edition, 2015. 
5.  Computer Aided Engineering Drawing, K. Balaveera Reddy, CBS Publishers, 2
nd
 Edition, 2015. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
PH106BS: ADVANCED ENGINEERING PHYSICS LAB 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To provide practical exposure to advanced concepts in solid-state and modern physics. 
2.  To  synthesize  and  study  the  physical  properties  of  materials  like  semiconductors, 
ferromagnetic, and ferroelectric substances. 
3.  To perform semiconductor characterization using Hall effect and band gap experiments. 
4.  To explore the working principles of lasers and optical fibers through hands-on experiments. 
5.  To develop skills in data analysis, interpretation, and scientific reporting. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. CO1:  Synthesize  and  analyze  nanomaterials  such  as  magnetite  (Fe₃O₄)  using  chemical 
methods. 
2. CO2: Determine key electrical, magnetic, and optical properties of semiconductors and other 
functional materials. 
3. CO3: Characterize semiconductors using Hall effect and energy gap measurement techniques. 
4. CO4: Demonstrate working knowledge of laser systems and optical fiber parameters through 
experimental study. 
5. CO5:  Apply  scientific  methods  for  accurate  data  collection,  analysis,  and  technical  report 
writing. 
 
List of Experiments: 
1.  Synthesis of magnetite (Fe
3
O
4
) powder using sol-gel method. 
2.  Determination of energy gap of a semiconductor. 
3.  Determination of Hall coefficient and carrier concertation of a given semiconductor. 
4.  Determination of magnetic moment of a bar magnet and horizontal earth magnetic field. 
5.  Study of B-H curve of a ferro magnetic material. 
6.  Study of P-E loop of a given ferroelectric crystal. 
7.  Determination of dielectric constant of a given material. 
8.  Determination of Curie’s temperature of a given ferroelectric material. 
9.  A) Determination of wavelength of a laser using diffraction grating. 
B) Study of V-I & L-I characteristics of a given laser diode. 
10. A) Determination of numerical aperture of a given optical fibre. 
B) Determination of bending losses of a given optical fibre. 
 
Note: Any 8 experiments are to be performed. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS107ES: PROGRAMMING FOR PROBLEM SOLVING LAB 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
 
 [Note:The programs may be executed using any available Open Source/ Freely available IDE 
Some of the Tools available are:  
CodeLite: https://codelite.org/ 
Code::Blocks: http://www.codeblocks.org/ 
DevCpp : http://www.bloodshed.net/devcpp.html 
Eclipse: http://www.eclipse.org 
This list is not exhaustive and is NOT in any order of preference] 
 
Course Objectives: The students will learn the following:  
1.  To work with an IDE to create, edit, compile, run and debug programs  
2.  To analyze the various steps in program development.  
3.  To  develop  programs  to  solve  basic  problems  by  understanding  basic  concepts  in  C  like 
operators, control statements etc.  
4.  To develop modular, reusable and readable C Programs using the concepts like functions, 
arrays etc. 
5.  To Write programs using the Dynamic Memory Allocation concept.  
6.  To create, read from and write to text and binary files 
 
Course Outcomes: The candidate is expected to be able to: 
1.  formulate the algorithms for simple problems 
2.  translate given algorithms to a working and correct program 
3.  correct syntax errors as reported by the compilers 
4.  identify and correct logical errors encountered during execution 
5.  represent and manipulate data with arrays, strings and structures 
6.  use pointers of different types 
7.  create, read and write to and from simple text and binary files 
8.  modularize the code with functions so that they can be reused 
 
PRACTICE SESSIONS: 
 
Simple numeric problems: 
a)  Write a program for finding the max and min from the three numbers. 
b)  Write the program for the simple, compound interest. 
c)  Write a program that prints a multiplication table for a given number and the number of rows in 
the table. For example, for a number 5 and rows = 3, the output should be: 
5 x 1 = 5 
5 x 2 = 10 
5 x 3 = 15 
d)  Write a program that shows the binary equivalent of a given positive number between 0 to 255. 
 
Expression Evaluation: 
a)  Write a C program, which takes two integer operands and one operator from the user, performs 
the operation and then prints the result. (Consider the operators +,-,*, /, % and use Switch 
Statement). 
b)  Write a program that finds if a given number is a prime number. 
c)  Write a C program to find the sum of individual digits of a positive integer and test given number 
is palindrome. 
d)  A Fibonacci sequence is defined as follows: the first and second terms in the sequence are 0 
and 1. Subsequent terms are found by adding the preceding two terms in the sequence. Write 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
a C program to generate the first n terms of the sequence. 
 
Arrays, Pointers and Functions: 
a)  Write a C program to find the minimum, maximum and average in an array of integers. 
b)  Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following: 
I.    Addition of Two Matrices 
II.    Multiplication of Two Matrices 
c)  Write a program for reading elements using a pointer into an array and display the values using 
the array. 
d)  Write a program for display values reverse order from an array using a pointer. 
  
Files: 
a)  Write a C program which copies one file to another, replacing all lowercase characters with 
their uppercase equivalents. 
b)  Write a C program to merge two files into a third file (i.e., the contents of the first file followed 
by those of the second are put in the third file). 
  
Strings: 
a)  Write a C program that uses functions to perform the following operations: 
I.    To insert a sub-string into a given main string from a given position. 
II.    To delete n Characters from a given position in a given string 
b)  Write a C program to determine if the given string is a palindrome or not (Spelled same in both 
directions with or without a meaning like madam, civic, noon, abcba, etc.) 
c)  Write a C program that displays the position of a character ch in the string S or – 1 if S doesn’t 
contain ch. 
d)  Write a C program to count the lines, words and characters in a given text. 
  
Sorting and Searching: 
a)  Write a C program that uses non-recursive function to search for a Key value in a given list of 
integers using linear search method. 
b)  Write a C program that uses non-recursive function to search for a Key value in a given sorted 
list of integers using binary search method. 
c)  Write a C program that implements the Bubble sort method to sort a given list of integers in 
ascending order. 
d)  Write a C program that sorts the given array of integers using selection sort in descending order 
e)  Write a C program that sorts the given array of integers using insertion sort in ascending order 
f)   Write a C program that sorts a given array of names. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Jeri R. Hanly and Elliot B.Koffman, Problem solving and Program Design in C 7th Edition, 
Pearson. 
2.  B.A. Forouzan and R.F. Gilberg C Programming and Data Structures, Cengage Learning, (3rd 
Edition). 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, Prentice Hall of 
India 
2.  E. Balagurusamy, Computer fundamentals and C, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill 
3.  Yashavant Kanetkar, Let Us C, 18th Edition, BPB  
4.  R.G. Dromey, How to solve it by Computer, Pearson (16th Impression) 
5.  Programming in C, Stephen G. Kochan, Fourth Edition, Pearson Education. 
6.  Herbert Schildt, C: The Complete Reference, Mc Graw Hill, 4th Edition 
7.  Byron Gottfried, Schaum’s Outline of Programming with C, McGraw-Hill 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
EE108ES: BASIC ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING LAB 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Prerequisites: Basic Electrical Engineering  
Course Objectives: 
   To measure the electrical parameters for different types of DC and AC circuits using 
conventional and theorems approach.   
   To study the transient response of various R, L and C circuits using different excitations.  
   To determine the performance of different types of DC, AC machines and Transformers. 
 
Course Outcomes: After learning the contents of this paper the student must be able to  
   Verify the basic Electrical circuits through different experiments. 
   Evaluate the performance calculations of Electrical Machines and Transformers through 
various testing methods. 
   Analyze the transient responses of R, L and C circuits for different input conditions.  
 
Course Objectives Program Outcomes 
   PO1 PO2 PO3 PO4 PO5 PO6 PO7 PO8 PO9 PO10 PO11 PO12 
To measure the 
electrical 
parameters for 
different types of 
DC and AC circuits 
using conventional 
and theorems 
approach 
3 2     1      2     0     0     1     2     0 1 2 
To study the 
transient response 
of various R, L and 
C circuits using 
different excitations 
3 2     1     1     3     0     0     0     2     0 1 1 
To determine the 
performance of 
different types of 
DC, AC machines 
and Transformers 
3 2     0      3     0     0     0     1     2 1 1 
 
Course Outcomes  Program Outcomes 
   PO1 PO2 PO3 PO4 PO5 PO6 PO7 PO8 PO9 PO10 PO11 PO12 
Verify the basic 
Electrical circuits 
through different 
experiments 
3 2     1     0     1     0     0     0     2     0 2 2 
Evaluate the 
performance 
calculations of 
Electrical Machines 
and Transformers 
through various 
testing methods 
3 2     1     0     3     1     0     1     1     2 1 2 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Analyse the 
transient 
responses of R, L 
and C circuits for 
different input 
conditions 
3 2     1     1     3     2     0     0     1     0 2 2 
 
List of experiments/demonstrations:  
PART- A (compulsory) 
1.  Verification of KVL and KCL  
2.  Verification of Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorem 
3.  Transient Response of Series RL and RC circuits for DC excitation  
4.  Resonance in series RLC circuit  
5.  Calculations and Verification of Impedance and Current of RL, RC and RLC series 
circuits  
6.  Measurement of Voltage, Current and Real Power in primary and Secondary Circuits of a 
Single-Phase Transformer  
7.  Performance Characteristics of a DC Shunt Motor 
8.  Torque-Speed Characteristics of a Three-phase Induction Motor. 
 
PART-B (any two experiments from the given list) 
1.  Verification of Superposition theorem. 
2.  Three Phase Transformer: Verification of Relationship between Voltages and Currents 
(Star-Delta, Delta-Delta, Delta-star, Star-Star) 
3.  Load Test on Single Phase Transformer (Calculate Efficiency and Regulation)  
4.  Measurement of Active and Reactive Power in a balanced Three-phase circuit  
5.  No-Load Characteristics of a Three-phase Alternator 
 
TEXT BOOKS:  
1.  D.P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 4
th
 Edition, 
2019.  
2.  MS Naidu and S Kamakshaiah, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2
nd
 Edition, 
2008.  
 
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1.  P. Ramana, M. Suryakalavathi, G.T.Chandrasheker,”Basic Electrical Engineering”, S. Chand, 
2
nd
 Edition, 2019. 
2.  D. C. Kulshreshtha, “Basic Electrical Engineering”, McGraw Hill, 2009 
3.  M. S. Sukhija, T. K. Nagsarkar, “Basic Electrical and Electronics Engineering”, Oxford, 1
st
 
Edition, 2012. 
4.  Abhijit Chakrabarthi, Sudipta Debnath, Chandan Kumar Chanda, “Basic Electrical 
Engineering”, 2
nd
 Edition, McGraw Hill, 2021. 
5.  L. S. Bobrow, “Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering”, Oxford University Press, 2011.  
6.  E. Hughes, “Electrical and Electronics Technology”, Pearson, 2010.  
7.  V. D. Toro, “Electrical Engineering Fundamentals”, Prentice Hall India, 1989. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS109ES: IT WORKSHOP 
 
B.Tech. I Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Course Objectives: The IT Workshop for engineers is a training lab course spread over 60 hours. The 
modules include training on PC Hardware, Internet & World Wide Web and Productivity tools including 
Word, Excel, PowerPoint and Publisher. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
   Perform Hardware troubleshooting  
   Understand Hardware components and inter dependencies 
   Safeguard computer systems from viruses/worms 
   Document/ Presentation preparation 
   Perform calculations using spreadsheets 
 
PC Hardware 
Task 1: Identify the peripherals of a computer, components in a CPU and its functions. Draw the block 
diagram of the CPU along with the configuration of each peripheral and submit to your instructor. 
 
Task 2: Every  student  should  disassemble  and  assemble  the  PC  back  to  working  condition.  Lab 
instructors should verify the work and follow it up with a Viva. Also students need to go through the 
video which shows the process of assembling a PC. A video would be given as part of the course 
content. 
 
Task 3: Every student should individually install MS windows on the personal computer. Lab instructor 
should verify the installation and follow it up with a Viva.  
 
Task 4: Every student should install Linux on the computer. This computer should  have  windows 
installed. The system should be configured as dual boot with both Windows and Linux. Lab instructors 
should verify the installation and follow it up with a Viva 
 
Internet & World Wide Web  
Task1: Orientation & Connectivity Boot Camp: Students should get connected to their Local Area 
Network and access the Internet. In the process they configure the TCP/IP setting. Finally students 
should demonstrate, to the instructor, how to access the websites and email. If there is no internet 
connectivity preparations need to be made by the instructors to simulate the WWW on the LAN. 
 
Task 2: Web Browsers, Surfing the Web: Students customize their web browsers with the LAN proxy 
settings, bookmarks, search toolbars and pop up blockers. Also, plug-ins like Macromedia Flash and 
JRE for applets should be configured. 
 
Task 3: Search Engines & Netiquette: Students should know what search engines are and how to 
use the search engines. A few topics would be given to the students for which they need to search on 
Google. This should be demonstrated to the instructors by the student.  
 
Task 4: Cyber Hygiene: Students would be exposed to the various threats on the internet and would 
be asked to configure their computer to be safe on the internet. They need to customize their browsers 
to block pop ups, block active x downloads to avoid viruses and/or worms. 
 
LaTeX and WORD 
Task 1 – Word Orientation: The mentor needs to give an overview of LaTeX and Microsoft (MS) office 
or equivalent (FOSS) tool word: Importance of LaTeX and MS office or equivalent (FOSS) tool Word as 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
word Processors, Details of the four tasks and features that would be covered in each, Using LaTeX 
and word – Accessing, overview of toolbars, saving files, Using help and resources, rulers, format 
painter in word. 
 
Task 2: Using LaTeX and Word to create a project certificate. Features to be covered:- Formatting 
Fonts in word, Drop Cap in word, Applying Text effects, Using Character Spacing, Borders and Colors, 
Inserting Header and Footer, Using Date and Time option in both LaTeX and Word. 
 
Task 3: Creating project abstract Features to be covered:-Formatting Styles, Inserting table, Bullets 
and Numbering, Changing Text Direction, Cell alignment, Footnote, Hyperlink, Symbols, Spell Check, 
Track Changes. 
 
Task 4: Creating a Newsletter: Features to  be covered:- Table  of Content, Newspaper columns, 
Images from files and clipart, Drawing toolbar and Word Art, Formatting Images, Textboxes, Paragraphs 
and Mail Merge in word. 
 
Excel 
Excel Orientation: The mentor needs to tell the importance of MS office or equivalent (FOSS) tool 
Excel as a Spreadsheet tool, give the details of the four tasks and features that would be covered in 
each. Using Excel – Accessing, overview of toolbars, saving excel files, Using help and resources. 
 
Task 1: Creating a Scheduler - Features to be covered: Gridlines, Format Cells, Summation, auto fill, 
Formatting Text  
 
Task 2: Calculating GPA - Features to be covered:- Cell Referencing, Formulae in excel – average, 
std.  deviation,  Charts,  Renaming  and  Inserting  worksheets,  Hyper  linking,  Count  function, 
LOOKUP/VLOOKUP 
 
Task 3: Split cells, freeze panes, group and outline, Sorting, Boolean and logical operators, Conditional 
formatting 
 
PowerPoint  
Task 1: Students will be working on basic power point utilities and tools which help them create basic 
PowerPoint presentations. PPT Orientation, Slide Layouts, Inserting Text, Word Art, Formatting Text, 
Bullets and Numbering, Auto Shapes, Lines and Arrows in PowerPoint.  
 
Task 2:  Interactive  presentations  -  Hyperlinks,  Inserting  –Images,  Clip  Art,  Audio,  Video,  Objects, 
Tables and Charts. 
 
Task 3: Master Layouts (slide, template, and notes), Types of views (basic, presentation, slide slotter, 
notes etc), and Inserting – Background, textures, Design Templates, Hidden slides. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Comdex Information Technology course tool kit Vikas Gupta, WILEY Dreamtech 
2.  The  Complete  Computer  upgrade  and  repair  book,  3rd  edition  Cheryl  A  Schmidt, WILEY 
Dreamtech 
3.  Introduction to Information Technology, ITL Education Solutions limited, Pearson Education. 
4.  PC Hardware - A Handbook – Kate J. Chase PHI (Microsoft) 
5.  LaTeX Companion – Leslie Lamport, PHI/Pearson. 
6.  IT Essentials PC Hardware and Software Companion Guide Third Edition by David Anfinson 
and Ken Quamme. – CISCO Press, Pearson Education.  
7.  IT Essentials PC Hardware and Software Labs and Study Guide Third Edition by Patrick Regan 
– CISCO Press, Pearson Education.  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
MA201BS: ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND VECTOR CALCULUS  
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.          L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Pre-requisites: Mathematical Knowledge at pre-university level 
Course Objectives: To learn 
1.  Methods of solving the differential equations of first and higher order. 
2.  Concept, properties of Laplace transforms. 
3.  Solving ordinary differential equations using Laplace transforms techniques. 
4.  The physical quantities involved in engineering field related to vector valued functions 
5.  The  basic  properties  of  vector  valued  functions  and  their  applications  to  line,  surface  and 
volume integrals 
 
Course outcomes: After learning the contents of this paper, the student must be able to 
1.  Identify whether the given differential equation of first order is exact or not 
2.  Solve higher differential equation and apply the concept of differential equation to real world 
problems. 
3.  Use the Laplace Transforms techniques for solving Ordinary Differential Equations. 
4.  Evaluate the Line, Surface and Volume integrals and converting them from one to another 
 
UNIT-I: First Order Ordinary Differential Equations        8 L 
Exact differential equations – Equations reducible to exact differential equations – linear and Bernoulli’s 
equations – Orthogonal Trajectories (only  in Cartesian Coordinates). Applications: Newton’s law  of 
cooling – Law of natural growth and decay.  
 
UNIT-II: Ordinary Differential Equations of Higher Order                   10 L 
Higher order linear differential equations with constant coefficients: Non-Homogeneous terms of the 
type 푒
௔௫
,sin푎푥,cos푎푥,  polynomials in 푥, 푒
௔௫
푉(푥) and 푥 푉(푥) – Method of variation of parameters. 
 
UNIT-III: Laplace Transforms                     10 L 
Laplace  Transforms:  Laplace  Transform  of  standard  functions  – First  shifting  theorem  –  Laplace 
transforms  of  functions multiplied  by  ‘t’  and  divided  by  ‘t’  – Laplace  transforms  of  derivatives  and 
integrals of function – Evaluation of integrals by Laplace transforms – Laplace transform of periodic 
functions  – Inverse  Laplace  transform  by  different  methods,  convolution  theorem  (without  proof). 
Applications: solving Initial value problems by Laplace Transform method. 
 
UNIT-IV: Vector Differentiation                    10 L 
Vector  point  functions  and  scalar  point  functions  –  Gradient  –  Divergence  and  Curl  –  Directional 
derivatives – Vector Identities – Scalar potential functions – Solenoidal and Irrotational vectors. 
 
UNIT-V: Vector Integration                      10 L 
Line, Surface and Volume Integrals. Theorems of Green, Gauss and Stokes (without proofs) and their 
applications 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. B.S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publishers, 36
th
 Edition, 2010. 
2. R.K. Jain and S.R.K. Iyengar, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Narosa Publications, 5
th
 
Edition, 2016. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9
th
 Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
2. G.B. Thomas and R.L. Finney, Calculus and Analytic geometry, 9
th
Edition, Pearson, Reprint, 
2002. 
3. N.P.  Bali and  Manish  Goyal, A  text  book  of  Engineering  Mathematics,  Laxmi  Publications, 
Reprint, 2008. 
4. H. K. Dass and Er. Rajnish Verma, Higher Engineering Mathematics, S Chand and Company 
Limited, New Delhi.  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CH202BS: ENGINEERING CHEMISTRY 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.        L   T   P   C 
                                                           3   0   0    3 
Course Objectives: 
1. To develop adaptability to new advances in Engineering Chemistry and acquire the 
essential skills to become a competent engineering professional. 
2. To understand the industrial significance of water treatment, fundamental principles of 
battery  chemistry,  and  the  impact  of  corrosion  along  with  its  control  methods  for 
structural protection. 
3. To  impart  foundational  knowledge  of  various  energy  sources  and  their  practical 
applications in engineering. 
4.  To  equip  students  with  an  understanding  of  smart  materials,  biosensors,  and  analytical 
techniques applicable in engineering, industrial, environmental, and biomedical fields. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
1.  Students will be able to understand the fundamental properties of water and its applications in 
both domestic and industrial purposes.  
2.  Students  will  gain  basic  knowledge  of  electrochemical  processes  and  their  relevance  to 
corrosion and its control methods. 
3.  Students will comprehend the significance and practical applications of batteries and various 
energy sources, enhancing their potential as future engineers and entrepreneurs. 
4.  Students  will  learn  the  basic  concepts  and  properties  of  polymers  and  other  engineering 
materials. 
5.  Students  will  be  able  to  apply  the  principles  of  UV-Visible,  IR  spectroscopy  and  Raman 
spectroscopy in analyzing pollutants in dye industries and biomedical applications. 
 
UNIT-I: Water and its treatment: [8] 
Introduction-  Hardness,  types,  degree  of  hardness  and  units.  Estimation  of  hardness  of  water  by 
complexometric method - Numerical problems. Potable water and its specifications (WHO) - Steps 
involved in the treatment of potable water - Disinfection of potable water by chlorination and break-
point chlorination. Defluoridation - Nalgonda technique. 
Boiler troubles: Scales, Sludges and Caustic embrittlement. Internal treatment of boiler feed water - 
Calgon  conditioning,  Phosphate  conditioning,  Colloidal  conditioning.  External  treatment  methods  - 
Softening of water by ion- exchange processes. Desalination of brackish water – Reverse osmosis. 
 
UNIT-II: Electrochemistry and Corrosion: [8] 
Introduction-  Electrode  potential,  standard  electrode  potential,  Nernst  equation  (no  derivation), 
electrochemical cell - Galvanic cell, cell representation, EMF of cell - Numerical problems. Types of 
electrodes, reference electrodes - Primary reference electrode - Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE), 
Secondary reference electrode - Calomel electrode. Construction, working and determination of pH of 
unknown solution using SHE and Calomel electrode.  
Corrosion: Introduction- Definition, causes and effects of corrosion – Theories of corrosion, chemical 
and electrochemical theories of corrosion, Types of corrosion: galvanic, water-line and pitting corrosion. 
Factors affecting rate of corrosion - Nature of the metal, Nature of the corroding environment. Corrosion 
control methods - Cathodic protection Methods - Sacrificial anode and impressed current methods. 
 
UNIT–III: Energy sources: [8] 
Batteries: Introduction  –  Classification  of  batteries  -  Primary,  secondary  and reserve  batteries  with 
examples.  Construction,  working  and  applications  of  Zn-air  and  Lithium  ion  battery.  Fuel  Cells  – 
Differences between a battery and a fuel cell, Construction and applications of Direct Methanol Fuel 
Cell (DMFC). 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Fuels: Introduction and characteristics of a good fuel, Calorific value – Units - HCV, LCV- Dulongs 
formula - Numerical problems.  
Fossil fuels: Introduction, Classification, Petroleum - Refining of Crude oil, Cracking - Types of cracking 
- Moving bed catalytic cracking.  LPG and CNG composition and uses.  
Synthetic  Fuels:  Fischer-Tropsch  process,  Introduction  and  applications  of  Hythane  and  Green 
Hydrogen. 
 
UNIT - IV: Polymers: [8] 
Definition  -  Classification  of  polymers:  Based  on  origin  and  tacticity  with  examples  –  Types  of 
polymerization - Addition (free radical addition mechanism) and condensation polymerization.  
Plastics, Elastomers and Fibers: Definition and applications (PVC, Buna-S, Nylon-6,6). Differences 
between themoplastics and thermo setting plastics, Fiber reinforced plastics (FRP). 
Conducting polymers: Definition and Classification with examples - Mechanism of conduction in trans-
poly-acetylene and applications of conducting polymers.  
Biodegradable polymers: Polylactic acid and its applications. 
 
UNIT-V- Advanced Functional Materials: [8] 
Smart  materials:  Introduction,  Classification  with  examples  -  Shape  Memory  Alloys  –  Nitinol, 
Piezoelectric materials – quartz and their engineering applications. 
Biosensor - Definition, Amperometric Glucose monitor sensor. 
Interpretative spectroscopic applications of UV-Visible spectroscopy for Analysis of pollutants in dye 
industry, IR spectroscopy in night vision-security, Pollution Under Control- CO sensor (Passive Infrared 
detection), Raman spectroscopy (application) - Tumour detection in medical applications.  
 
TEXT BOOKS:  
1.  Engineering Chemistry by P.C. Jain and M. Jain, Dhanpatrai Publishing Company, 2010.  
2.  Engineering Chemistry by Rama Devi, Dr. P. Aparna and Rath, Cengage learning, 2025. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Engineering  Chemistry:  by  Thirumala  Chary  Laxminarayana  &  Shashikala,  Pearson 
Publications (2020) 
2.  Engineering Chemistry by Shashi Chawla, Dhanpatrai and Company (P) Ltd. Delhi 2011. 
3.  Engineering Chemistry by Shikha Agarwal, Cambridge University Press, Delhi 2015. 
4.  Engineering Analysis of Smart Material Systems by Donald J. Leo, Wiley, 2007.  
5.  Challenges and Opportunities in Green Hydrogen by Editors: Paramvir Singh, Avinash Kumar 
Agarwal, Anupma Thakur, R.K Sinha. 
6.  Raman  Spectroscopy  in  Human  Health  and  Biomedicine,  https://www.worldscientific.com/ 
doi/epdf/10.1142/13094  
7.  E-Content- https://doi.org/10.1142/13094 | October 2023 
8.  E-books: 
https://archive.org/details/EngineeringChemistryByShashiChawla/page/n11/mode/2u 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS203ES: DATA STRUCTURES 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.          L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Prerequisites: A course on “Programming for Problem Solving 
 
Course Objectives 
   Exploring basic data structures such as stacks and queues. 
   Introduces a variety of data structures such as hash tables, search trees, tries, heaps, graphs. 
   Introduces sorting and pattern matching algorithms. 
 
Course Outcomes 
   Ability to select the data structures that efficiently model the information in a problem. 
   Ability  to  assess  efficiency  trade-offs  among  different  data  structure  implementations  or 
combinations. 
   Implement and know the application of algorithms for sorting and pattern matching. 
   Design programs using a variety of data structures, including hash tables, binary and general 
tree structures, search trees, tries, heaps, graphs, and AVL-trees. 
 
UNIT – I 
Introduction to Data Structures: Basic Terminology, Classification of Data Structures, Operation on Data 
Structures, abstract data types, selecting a Data Structure, Linear list – Introduction, singly linked list, 
Circular  Linked  Lists,  Doubly  Linked  List,  Stacks-  Operations,  Stack  algorithm,  Stack  ADT,  Stack 
applications, Queues- operations, Queue Algorithm, Queue ADT, Queue Applications. 
  
UNIT - II 
Trees: Introduction, Types of Trees, creating a Binary Tree from a General Tree, traversing a Binary 
Tree, Binary Search Trees (BST), BST Operations- Searching, Insertion and Deletion, BST ADT, BST 
Applications, Threaded Binary Trees, AVL Trees, Red –Black Trees, Splay Trees 
 
UNIT – III 
Multi way Search Trees: Introduction, B Trees, B Trees ADT, 2-3 Trees, 2-3- Tree, B* Tree, B+ Trees 
Heaps: Binary Heaps, Binomial heaps, Fibonacci heaps, Comparison of Various Heaps, Applications 
Searching: Introduction, Interpolation Search, Jump search 
 
UNIT - IV 
Graphs: Introduction, Directed Graphs, Bi connected Components, Representation of Graphs, Graph 
Traversal Algorithms, Graph ADT, Applications of Graphs 
Sorting: Radix Sort, Heap sort, Shell Sort, Tree Sort, 
 
UNIT – V 
Hashing and Collision: Introduction, Hash Tables, Hash Functions, Different Hash Functions: Division 
Method, Multiplication Method, Mid-square Method, Folding Method; collisions: Collision Resolution by 
Open Addressing, Collision Resolution by Chaining 
Files and their Organization: Introduction, Data hierarchy, File Attributes, Text and Binary Files, Basic 
File Operations, File Organization, Indexing 
  
TEXTBOOKS: 
1.  Data Structures: A Pseudocode Approach with C, 2 nd Edition, R. F. Gilberg and B.A.Forouzan, 
Cengage Learning 
2.  Data Structure using C– Reema Thareja, 3
rd
 Edition, Oxford University Press. 
REFERENCE: 
1. Data Structures using C – A. S.Tanenbaum, Y. Langsam, and M.J. Augenstein, PHI/Pearson 
Education.  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
EC204ES: ELECTRONIC DEVICES AND CIRCUITS 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.        L   T   P   C 
                                                           3   0   0    3 
 
Course Overview: This course introduces fundamental semiconductor devices and their behavior, 
including diodes, BJTs, and FETs. It covers their characteristics, applications, and the analysis of basic 
electronic  circuits.  The  course  also  explores  rectifiers,  voltage  regulation,  amplifier  design,  and 
advanced semiconductor technologies like FinFETs and CNTFETs. Emphasis is placed on developing 
a  strong  foundation  for  analog  circuit  design  and  understanding  modern  device  technologies  in 
electronics. 
 
Course Outcomes: By the end of this course, students will be able to: 
CO1: Analyze the electrical characteristics and models of semiconductor diodes and apply them in 
rectifier and clipping circuits. 
CO2: Evaluate the operation and configurations of Bipolar Junction Transistors (BJTs) and analyze 
their input and output characteristics. 
CO3: Design appropriate biasing networks for BJTs and determine the operating point for amplifier 
applications. 
CO4:  Analyze  transistor  amplifier  circuits  using  h-parameter  models  and  assess  performance  for 
various configurations. 
CO5: Analyze the structure, working, and characteristics of JFETs, MOSFETs, and advanced devices 
like FinFETs and CNTFETs, and compare modern device technologies. 
 
Course Articulation Matrix 
COs/POs   PO1   PO2   PO3   PO4   PO5   PO6   PO7   PO8   PO9   PO10   PO11 
CO1 3 3 2 2 1 1 - - - - - 
CO2 3 3 2 2 1 - - - - - - 
CO3 3 3 3 2 1 - - - - - - 
CO4 3 3 3 2 2 - - - - - 1 
CO5 3 3 2 2 2 1 - - - - 2 
 
Syllabus: 
UNIT - I:  
Diode Characteristics and Applications: PN junction diode – I-V characteristics, Diode resistance 
and capacitance, Diode models (Ideal, Simplified, Piecewise Linear), Rectifiers – Half-wave, Full-wave 
(Center-tap  and  bridge),  Capacitor  filter  for  rectifiers,  Clippers  and  clampers,  Zener  diode  –  I-V 
characteristics and voltage regulation. 
 
UNIT - II:  
Bipolar Junction Transistor (BJT): Structure and working principle of BJT, Current components and 
transistor action, Configurations: Common Base (CB), Common Emitter (CE), Common Collector (CC), 
Input and output characteristics, Determination of h-parameters from transistor characteristics. 
 
UNIT - III:  
BJT Biasing: Need for biasing and stabilization, Load line and operating point, Biasing techniques: 
Fixed bias, Collector-to-base bias, Voltage divider bias, Stability factors and thermal runaway 
 
UNIT - IV:  
Transistor Amplifiers: Transistor as a small-signal amplifier, h-parameter equivalent circuit, CE, CB, 
CC amplifier analysis using h-parameters, Approximate CE model – with and without emitter bypass 
capacitor. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
 
UNIT - V:  
Special Purpose Diodes: Principle of Operation of – SCR, Tunnel Diode, Varactor Diode, Photo Diode, 
Solar Cell, LED and Schottky Diode 
 
Field Effect Transistors and Advanced Devices: JFET: Structure, operation, and characteristics, 
MOSFET: Enhancement and Depletion modes – Structure, operation, and characteristics, Advanced 
Devices:  FinFETs  -  3D  structure,  Scaling  advantages,  CNTFETs  -  Structure,  ballistic  transport, 
fabrication, Comparison: CMOS vs. FinFET vs. CNTFET.  
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Millman, Jacob, and Christos C. Halkias. Electronic Devices and Circuits. Tata McGraw-Hill, 
1991. 
2.  Boylestad, Robert L., and Louis Nashelsky. Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory. Pearson, 
11th ed., 2013. 
3.  Sedra, Adel S., and Kenneth C. Smith. Microelectronic Circuits. Oxford University Press, 7th 
ed., 2014. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Bell, David A. Electronic Devices and Circuits. Oxford University Press, 5th ed., 2008. 
2.  Neamen, Donald A. Electronic Circuit Analysis and Design. McGraw-Hill, 2nd ed., 2001. 
3.  Salivahanan,  S.,  and  N.  Suresh  Kumar. Electronic  Devices  and  Circuits.  McGraw-Hill 
Education, 4th ed., 2017. 
4.  Razavi, Behzad. Fundamentals of Microelectronics. Wiley, 2nd ed., 2013. 
5.  Taur, Yuan, and Tak H. Ning. Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices. Cambridge University 
Press, 2nd ed., 2009. 
 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
EN205HS: ENGLISH FOR SKILL ENHANCEMENT 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.        L   T   P   C 
                                                           3   0   0    3 
INTRODUCTION 
National Education Policy-2020 aims at preparing students with knowledge, skills, values, leadership 
qualities and initiates them for lifelong learning. It also emphasizes language study and promotion of 
languages  through  understanding  and  proper  interpretation.  English  language  is  central  to  the 
educational eco system. The importance of language as medium of communication for personal, social, 
official and  professional needs to  be  emphasized  for  clear  and  concise  expression.  Teaching  and 
learning of receptive and productive skills viz., Listening, Speaking, Reading and Writing (LSRW) are 
to be taught and learnt effectively in the undergraduate Engineering programs. Learners should be 
encouraged to engage in a rigorous process of learning to become proficient users of English language 
by adopting a deeply focused and yet flexible approach as opposed to rote learning. 
 
In  this  connection,  suitable  syllabus,  effective  pedagogy,  continuous  assessments  and  students’ 
involvement  result  in  productive  learning.  This  course  supports  the  latest  knowledge  and  skill 
requirements and shall meet specified learning outcomes. The main objectives of English language 
teaching and learning as medium of communication and for promotion of cultural values are embedded 
in this syllabus. Efforts are being made in providing a holistic approach towards value-based language 
learning which equips the learner with receptive as well as productive skills. 
 
The focus in this syllabus is on skill development, fostering ideas and practice of language skills in 
various contexts and cultures in the areas of vocabulary, grammar, reading and writing. For this, the 
teachers should use the prescribed textbook for detailed study. The students should be encouraged to 
read  the  texts  leading  to  reading comprehension.  The  time  should be  utilized  for  working  out  the 
exercises given after each excerpt, and also for supplementing the exercises with authentic materials 
of a similar kind, for example, newspaper articles, advertisements, promotional material.  
 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES: This course will enable the students to: 
a.  Improve their vocabulary. 
b.  Use appropriate sentence structures in their oral and written communication. 
c.  Develop their reading and study skills.  
d.  Equip students to write paragraphs, essays, précis and draft letters. 
e.  Acquire skills for Technical report writing. 
 
COURSE OUTCOMES: Students will be able to:  
a.  Choose appropriate vocabulary in their oral and written communication. 
b.  Demonstrate their understanding of the rules of functional grammar and sentence structures.  
c.  Develop comprehension skills from known and unknown passages. 
d.  Write paragraphs, essays, précis and draft letters.    
e.  Write abstracts and reports in various contexts.   
 
SYLLABUS: The course content / study material is divided into Five Units. 
 
UNIT –I 
Theme:  Perspectives  
Lesson on ‘The Generation  Gap’  by  Benjamin M. Spock from the prescribed 
textbook titled English for the Young in the Digital World published by Orient 
Black Swan Pvt. Ltd.  
Vocabulary:   The Concept of Word Formation -The Use of Prefixes and Suffixes - Words Often 
Misspelt - Synonyms and Antonyms 
Grammar: Identifying Common Errors in Writing with Reference to Parts of Speech particularly 
Articles and Prepositions – Degrees of Comparison 
Reading:  Reading and Its Importance- Sub Skills of Reading – Skimming and Scanning. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Writing:  Sentence  Structures  and  Types  -Use  of  Phrases  and  Clauses  in  Sentences- 
Importance of Proper Punctuation- Techniques for Writing Precisely –Nature and Style 
of Formal Writing.  
 
UNIT –II 
Theme:  Digital Transformation  
Lesson on ‘Emerging Technologies’ from the prescribed textbook titled English 
for the Young in the Digital World published by Orient BlackSwan Pvt. Ltd.  
Vocabulary:   Homophones, Homonyms and Homographs  
Grammar: Identifying Common Errors in Writing with Reference to Noun-pronoun Agreement and 
Subject-verb Agreement. 
Reading: Reading Strategies-Guessing Meaning from Context – Identifying Main Ideas –  
Exercises for Practice  
Writing:  Paragraph  Writing  –  Types,  Structures  and  Features  of  a  Paragraph  -  Creating 
Coherence  –  Linkers  and  Connectives  -  Organizing  Principles  in  a  Paragraph  – 
Defining-  Describing  People,  Objects,  Places  and  Events  –  Classifying-  Providing 
Examples or Evidence - Essay Writing - Writing Introduction and Conclusion. 
 
UNIT –III 
Theme:  Attitude and Gratitude 
Poems on ‘Leisure’ by William Henry Davies   and  ‘Be  Thankful’  -  Unknown 
Author from the prescribed textbook titled English for the Young in the Digital 
World published by Orient BlackSwan Pvt. Ltd.  
Vocabulary:    Words Often Confused - Words from Foreign Languages and their Use in English. 
Grammar:  Identifying  Common  Errors  in  Writing  with  Reference  to  Misplaced  Modifiers  and 
Tenses. 
Reading:  Sub-Skills of Reading – Identifying Topic Sentence and Providing Supporting Ideas - 
Exercises for Practice. 
Writing:  Format of a Formal Letter-Writing Formal Letters E.g.., Letter of Complaint, Letter of 
Requisition, Job Application with CV/Resume –Difference between Writing a Letter and 
an Email - Email Etiquette. 
 
UNIT –IV  
Theme:  Entrepreneurship 
Lesson on ‘Why a Start-Up Needs to Find its Customers First’ by Pranav Jain from 
the prescribed textbook titled English for the Young in the Digital World published 
by Orient BlackSwan Pvt. Ltd.  
Vocabulary:   Standard Abbreviations in English – Inferring Meanings of Words through Context – 
Phrasal Verbs – Idioms.  
Grammar:  Redundancies and Clichés in Written Communication – Converting Passive to Active 
Voice and Vice-Versa. 
Reading:       Prompt  Engineering  Techniques–  Comprehending  and  Generating  Appropriate 
Prompts - Exercises for Practice 
Writing:   Writing Practices- Note Making-Précis Writing. 
 
UNIT –V 
Theme:  Integrity and Professionalism  
Lesson on ‘Professional Ethics’ from the prescribed textbook titled English for 
the Young in the Digital World published by Orient BlackSwan Pvt. Ltd.  
Vocabulary:   Technical Vocabulary and their Usage– One Word Substitutes – Collocations.  
Grammar: Direct and Indirect Speech - Common Errors in English (Covering all the other aspects 
of grammar which were not covered in the previous units) 
Reading: Survey, Question, Read, Recite and Review (SQ3R Method) – Inferring the Meaning 
and Evaluating a Text- Exercises for Practice 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Writing: Report  Writing  -  Technical  Reports-  Introduction  –  Characteristics  of  a 
Report – Categories of Reports Formats- Structure of Reports (Manuscript 
Format) -Types of Reports - Writing a Technical Report. 
 
Note: Listening and Speaking skills which are given under Unit-6 in AICTE Model Curriculum are covered 
in the syllabus of ELCS Lab Course. 
  (Note: As the syllabus of English given in AICTE Model Curriculum-2018 for B.Tech. First Year is 
Open-ended, besides following the prescribed textbook, it is required to prepare teaching/learning 
materials by the teachers collectively in the form of handouts based on the needs of the students 
in their respective colleges for effective teaching/learning in the class.) 
 
TEXT BOOK: 
1.  Board of Editors. 2025. English for the Young in the Digital World. Orient Black Swan Pvt. Ltd.  
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Swan, Michael. (2016). Practical English Usage. Oxford University Press. New Edition. 
2. Karal, Rajeevan. 2023. English Grammar Just for You. Oxford University Press. New Delhi  
3.  2024.  Empowering  with  Language:  Communicative  English  for  Undergraduates. Cengage 
Learning India Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi 
4.  Sanjay Kumar & Pushp Lata. 2022. Communication Skills – A Workbook. Oxford University 
Press. New Delhi 
5.  Wood,F.T.  (2007). Remedial English Grammar. Macmillan. 
6.  Vishwamohan, Aysha. (2013). English for Technical Communication for Engineering Students.  
Mc Graw-Hill Education India Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CH206BS: ENGINEERING CHEMISTRY LAB 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Course Description: The course includes experiments based on fundamental principles of chemistry 
essential for engineering students, aiming to develop practical skills and reinforce theoretical concepts. 
 
Course Objectives 
1.  Students will understand and perform experiments based on core chemical principles relevant 
to engineering applications. 
2.  Students  will  learn  to  estimate  the  hardness  of  water  to  assess  its  suitability  for  drinking 
purposes. 
3.  Students will acquire the ability to perform acid-base titrations using instrumental methods such 
as conductometry, potentiometry, and pH metry. 
4.  Students will gain hands-on experience in synthesizing polymers like Bakelite and Nylon – 6, 6 
in the laboratory. 
5.  Students  will  learn  to  determine  the  unknown  concentration  of  potassium  permanganate 
(KMnO4) using a calibration curve. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
1.  Students  will  develop  practical  skills  through  hands-on  chemistry  experiments  relevant  to 
engineering. 
2.  Students  will  learn  to  determine  important  parameters  such  as  water  hardness  and  the 
corrosion rate of mild steel under various conditions. 
3.  Students will be able to apply techniques like conductometry, potentiometry, and pH metry to 
determine concentrations or equivalence points in acid-base reactions. 
4.  Students will gain experience in synthesizing polymers such as Bakelite and Nylon-6,6. 
5.  Students  will understand the  working principle of colorimetry  and the relationship between 
absorbance and concentration (Beer-Lambert Law). 
 
List of Experiments:  
I.   Volumetric Analysis: Estimation of Hardness of water by EDTA Complexometry method. 
II.   Conductometry: 
1.  Estimation of the concentration of strong acid by Conductometry.  
2.  Estimation  of  the  concentration  of  strong  and  weak  acid  in  an  acid  mixture  by 
Conductometry. 
III.   Potentiometry: 
1.  Estimation of concentration of Fe
+2
ion by Potentiometry using KMnO
4
.  
2.  Estimation of concentration of strong acid with strong base by Potentiometry using 
quinhydrone 
IV.   pH Metry: Determination of an acid concentration using pH meter.  
V.   Colorimetry: Verification of Lambert-Beer’s law using KMnO
4
. 
VI.   Preparations:  
1.  Preparation of Bakelite.  
2.  Preparation Nylon – 6, 6. 
VII.   Corrosion: Determination of rate of corrosion of mild steel in the presence and absence of 
inhibitor.  
VIII.   Virtual lab experiments:  
1.  Construction of Fuel cell and it’s working.  
2.  Smart materials for Biomedical applications  
3.  Batteries for electrical vehicles.  
4.  Functioning of solar cell and its applications.  
 
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1.  Lab manual for Engineering chemistry by B. Ramadevi and P. Aparna, S Chand Publications, 
New Delhi (2022)  
2.  Vogel’s text book of practical organic chemistry 5th edition  
3.  Inorganic Quantitative analysis by A.I. Vogel, ELBS Publications.  
4.  College Practical Chemistry by V.K. Ahluwalia, Narosa Publications Ltd. New Delhi (2007). 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS207ES: DATA STRUCTURES LAB 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Prerequisites: 1. A Course on “Programming for problem solving”. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  It covers various concepts of C programming language 
2.  It introduces searching and sorting algorithms 
3.  It provides an understanding of data structures such as stacks and queues. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Ability to develop C programs for computing and real-life applications using basic elements like 
control statements, arrays, functions, pointers and strings,  and data structures  like stacks, 
queues and linked lists.  
2.  Ability to Implement searching and sorting algorithms 
 
List of Experiments 
1.  Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on singly linked list.: 
   i) Creation   ii) Insertion      iii) Deletion      iv) Traversal  
2.  Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on doubly linked list.: 
   i) Creation   ii) Insertion      iii) Deletion      iv) Traversal  
3.  Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on circular linked list.: 
   i) Creation   ii) Insertion      iii) Deletion     iv) Traversal  
4.  Write a  program that implement stack (its operations) using  
   i) Arrays     ii) ADT   
5.  Write a program that implement Queue (its operations) using 
   i) Arrays     ii) ADT  
6.  Write a program that implements the following sorting methods to sort a given list of integers in 
ascending order 
   i ) Radix Sort, ii) Heap sort, iii) Shell Sort, iv) Tree Sort  
7.   Write a program to implement the tree traversal methods (Recursive and Non-Recursive). 
8.  Write a program to implement  
   i) Binary Search tree     ii) B Trees iii) B+ Trees    iv) AVL trees   v) Red - Black trees              
9.  Write a program to implement the graph traversal methods. 
10. Write a program to implement the following Hash Functions: i) Division Method, ii) Multiplication 
Method, iii) Mid-square Method, iv) Folding Method 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Fundamentals of Data Structures in C, 2
nd
 Edition, E. Horowitz, S. Sahni and Susan Anderson 
Freed, Universities Press. 
2.  Data Structures using C – A. S. Tanenbaum, Y. Langsam, and M. J. Augenstein, PHI/Pearson 
Education.  
 
REFERENCE BOOK: 
1.  Data Structures: A Pseudocode Approach with C, 2
nd
 Edition, R. F. Gilberg and B. A. Forouzan, 
Cengage Learning. 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
EN208HS: ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND COMMUNICATION SKILLS LAB 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
 
The English Language and Communication Skills (ELCS) Lab focuses on listening and speaking 
skills, particularly on the production and practice of sounds of language and familiarizes the students 
with the use of English in everyday situations both in formal and informal contexts.  
 
Listening Skills: 
Objectives 
1.  To enable students develop their active listening skills 
2.  To equip students with necessary training in listening, so that they can comprehend the speech 
of people from different linguistic backgrounds 
 
Speaking Skills: 
3.  To improve their pronunciation and neutralize accent  
4.  To enable students express themselves fluently and appropriately 
5.  To practise speaking in social and professional contexts  
 
Learning Outcomes: Students will be able to: 
1.  Listen actively and identify important information in spoken texts  
2.  Interpret the speech and infer the intention of the speaker      
3.  Improve their accent for intelligibility 
4.  Speak fluently with clarity and confidence 
5.  Use the language in real life situations  
 
Syllabus: English Language and Communication Skills Lab (ELCS) shall have two parts: 
a.  Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) Lab which focusses on listening skills 
b.  Interactive Communication Skills (ICS) Lab which focusses on speaking skills 
 
The following course content is prescribed for the English Language and Communication Skills Lab. 
 
Exercise – I  
CALL Lab:  
Instruction: Speech Sounds-Listening Skill - Importance – Purpose - Types- Barriers- Active Listening  
Practice:  Listening to Distinguish Speech Sounds (Minimal Pairs) - Testing Exercises  
ICS Lab:  
 Diagnostic Test – Activity titled ‘Express Your View’ 
 Instruction:  Spoken and Written language - Formal and Informal English - Greetings - Introducing 
Oneself and Others 
Practice: Any Ice-Breaking Activity  
 
Exercise – II 
CALL Lab:  
Instruction:  Listening vs. Hearing - Barriers to Listening  
Practice: Listening for General Information   - Multiple Choice Questions - Listening Comprehension 
Exercises (It is essential to identify a suitable passage with exercises for practice.) 
ICS Lab:  
Instruction: Features of Good Conversation – Strategies for Effective Communication  
Practice: Role Play Activity - Situational Dialogues –Expressions used in Various Situations –Making 
Requests and Seeking Permissions – Taking Leave - Telephone Etiquette  
 
Exercise - III 
CALL Lab:  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Instruction:  Errors in Pronunciation – Tips for Neutralizing Mother Tongue Influence (MTI) 
Practice: Differences  between  British  and  American  Pronunciation  –Listening  Comprehension 
Exercises 
ICS Lab:  
Instruction:  Describing Objects, Situations, Places, People and Events  
Practice: Picture Description Activity – Looking at a Picture and Describing Objects, Situations, Places, 
People and Events (A wide range of Materials / Handouts are to be made available in the lab.) 
 
Exercise – IV 
CALL Lab:  
Instruction:  Techniques for Effective Listening  
Practice: Listening for Specific Details - Listening  -  Gap  Fill  Exercises  - Listening Comprehension 
Exercises  
(It is essential to identify a suitable passage with exercises for practice.) 
ICS Lab:  
Instruction: How to Tell a Good Story - Story Star- Sequencing-Creativity 
Practice:  Activity on Telling and Retelling Stories - Collage  
 
Exercise – V 
CALL Lab: 
Instruction: Identifying the literal and implied meaning 
Practice: Listening for Evaluation - Write the Summary – Listening Comprehension Exercises 
(It is essential to identify a suitable passage with exercises for practice.) 
ICS Lab:  
Instruction: Understanding Non-Verbal Communication 
Practice: Silent Speech - Dumb Charades Activity  
 Post-Assessment Test on ‘Express Your View’ 
 
Minimum Requirement of infrastructural facilities for ELCS Lab: 
 
1.  Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) Lab:  
The Computer Assisted Language Learning Lab has to accommodate 40 students with 40 systems, 
with  one  Master  Console,  LAN  facility  and  English  language  learning  software  for  self-  study  by 
students. 
System Requirement (Hardware component): 
Computer  network  with  LAN  facility  (minimum  40  systems  with  multimedia)  with  the  following 
specifications: 
i) Computers with Suitable Configuration 
ii) High Fidelity Headphones 
 
2.  Interactive Communication Skills (ICS) Lab:  
The Interactive Communication Skills Lab: A Spacious room with movable chairs and audio-
visual aids with a Public Address System, a T. V. or LCD, a digital stereo – audio & video system 
and camcorder etc. 
 
 Note: English Language Teachers are requested to prepare Materials / Handouts for each 
Activity for the Use of those Materials in CALL & ICS Labs.  
 
Suggested Software: 
   Cambridge Advanced Learners’ English Dictionary with CD.  
   Grammar Made Easy by Darling Kindersley. 
   Punctuation Made Easy by Darling Kindersley. 
   Oxford Advanced Learner’s Compass, 10
th
 Edition. 
   English in Mind (Series 1-4), Herbert Puchta and Jeff Stranks with Meredith Levy, Cambridge. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
   English  Pronunciation  in  Use  (Elementary,  Intermediate,  Advanced)  Cambridge  University 
Press. 
   English Vocabulary in Use (Elementary, Intermediate, Advanced) Cambridge University Press. 
   TOEFL & GRE (KAPLAN, AARCO & BARRONS, USA, Cracking GRE by CLIFFS). 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Shobha, KN & Rayen, J. Lourdes. (2019). Communicative English – A workbook. Cambridge 
University Press 
2.  Board of Editors. (2016). ELCS Lab Manual: A Workbook for CALL and ICS Lab Activities. 
Orient BlackSwan Pvt. Ltd.  
3.  Mishra, Veerendra et al. (2020). English Language Skills: A Practical Approach. Cambridge 
University Press 
4.  (2022). English Language Communication Skills – Lab Manual cum Workbook.  Cengage 
Learning India Pvt. Ltd.  
5.  Ur, Penny and Wright, Andrew. 2022. Five Minute Activities – A Resource Book for Language 
Teachers. Cambridge University Press. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
ME209ES: ENGINEERING WORKSHOP 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Prerequisites: Practical skill 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To introduce students to basic manufacturing processes and workshop practices. 
2.  To provide hands-on training in carpentry, fitting, welding, sheet metal, and machining 
3.  To develop skills in using hand tools and measuring instruments. 
4.  To enhance safety awareness and proper handling of workshop equipment. 
5.  To build a foundational understanding of industrial production and fabrication. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student will be able to:  
1.  Understand the basic manufacturing processes and operations. 
2.  Use hand tools and equipment safely and efficiently. 
3.  Perform basic operations in carpentry, fitting, welding, sheet metal work, and machining 
4.  Read and interpret workshop drawings 
5.  Develop teamwork, time management, and quality awareness in a workshop environment. 
 
 1. TRADES FOR EXERCISES: At least two exercises from each trade: 
i. Carpentry: T- Lap Joint, Dovetail Joint, Mortise and Tenon Joint 
ii. Fitting:  V- Fit, Dovetail Fit and Semi- circular fit 
iii. Tin Smithy: Square Tin, Rectangular Tray and Conical Funnel 
iv. Foundry: Preparation of Green Sand Mould using Single Piece and Split Pattern 
v. Welding Practice: Arc Welding and Gas Welding 
vi. House wiring: Parallel and Series, Two-way Switch and Tube Light 
vii. Black Smithy: Round to Square, Fan Hook and S- Hook 
 
2. TRADES FOR DEMONSTRATION AND EXPOSURE:  Plumbing, Machine Shop, Metal Cutting 
(Water Plasma), Power tools in construction and Wood Working 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Workshop Practice, B. L. Juneja, Cengage Learning India, 1st edition, 2015. 
2.  Workshop Practice Manual, K. Venkata Reddy, BS Publication, 6th Edition, Rpt.2025. 
 
REFERENCE BOOK: 
1.  Workshop Manual, K. Venugopal, Anuradha Publications, 2012th edition, 2012. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS210ES: PYTHON PROGRAMMING LAB 
 
B.Tech. I Year II Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Course Objectives: 
   To install and run the Python interpreter 
   To learn control structures. 
   To Understand Lists, Dictionaries in python 
   To Handle Strings and Files in Python 
 
Course Outcomes: After completion of the course, the student should be able to 
   Develop the application specific codes using python. 
   Understand Strings, Lists, Tuples and Dictionaries in Python 
   Verify programs using modular approach, file I/O, Python standard library 
   Implement Digital Systems using Python 
 
 Note:  The lab experiments will be like the following experiment examples. 
 
List of Experiments: 
1.   
I.    Use a web browser to go to the Python website http://python.org. This page contains 
information about Python and links to Python-related pages, and it gives you the ability 
to search the Python documentation. 
II.    Start the Python interpreter and type help() to start the online help utility. 
1.  Start a Python interpreter and use it as a Calculator. 
2.  Write a program to calculate compound interest when principal, rate and number of periods are 
given. 
3.  Read the name, address, email and phone number of a person through the keyboard and print 
the details. 
4.  Print the below triangle using for loop. 
5 
4 4 
3 3 3 
2 2 2 2 
1 1 1 1 1 
5.  Write a program to check whether the given input is digit or lowercase character or uppercase 
character or a special character(use 'if-else-if' ladder) 
6.  Python program to print all prime numbers in a given interval (use break) 
7.  Write a program to convert a list and tuple into arrays. 
8.  Write a program to find common values between two arrays. 
9.  Write  a  function  called  palindrome  that  takes  a  string  argument  and  returnsTrue  if  it  is  a 
palindrome and False otherwise. Remember that you can use the built-in function len to check 
the length of a string. 
10. Write a function called is_sorted that takes a list as a parameter and returns True if the list  is 
sorted in ascending order and False otherwise. 
11. Write a function called has_duplicates that takes a list and returns True if there is any element 
that appears more than once. It should not modify the original list. 
12. Write a function called remove_duplicates that takes a list and returns a new list with only the 
unique elements from the original. Hint: they don’t have to be in the same order. 
13. The wordlist I provided, words.txt, doesn’t contain single letter words. So you might want to add 
“I”, “a”, and the empty string. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
14. Write a python code to read dictionary values from the user. Construct a function to invert its 
content. i.e., keys should be values and values should be keys. 
15. Add a comma between the characters. If the given word is 'Apple', it should become 'A,p,p,l,e' 
16. Remove the given word in all the places in a string? 
17. Write a function that takes a sentence as an input parameter and replaces the first letter of 
every word with the corresponding upper case letter and the rest of the letters in  the word by 
corresponding letters in lower  case without using a built-in function? 
18. Writes a recursive function that generates all binary strings of n-bit length 
19. Write a python program that defines a matrix and prints 
20. Write a python program to perform multiplication of two square matrices 
21. How do you make a module? Give an example of construction of a module using different 
geometrical shapes and operations on them as its functions. 
22. Use the structure of exception handling all general-purpose exceptions.  
23. Write a function called draw_rectangle that takes a Canvas and a Rectangle as arguments and 
draws a representation of the Rectangle on the Canvas. 
24. Add an attribute named color to your Rectangle objects and modify draw_rectangle so that it 
uses the color attribute as the fill color. 
25. Write a function called draw_point that takes a Canvas and a Point as arguments and draws a 
representation of the Point on the Canvas. 
26. Define a new class called Circle with appropriate attributes and instantiate a few   Circle objects. 
Write a function called draw_circle that draws circles on the canvas. 
27. Write a python code to read a phone number and email-id from the user and validate it for 
correctness. 
28. Write a Python code to merge two given file contents into a third file. 
29. Write a Python code to open a given file and construct a function to check for given words 
present in it and display on found. 
30. Write a Python code to Read text from a text file, find the word with most number of occurrences 
31. Write a function that reads a file file1and displays the number of words, number of vowels, 
blank spaces, lower case letters and uppercase letters. 
32. Import numpy, Plotpy and Scipy and explore their functionalities. 
33. Install NumPypackage with pip and explore it. 
34. Write a program to implement Digital Logic Gates – AND, OR, NOT, EX-OR 
35. Write a GUI program to create a window wizard having two text labels, two text fields and two 
buttons as Submit and Reset. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Supercharged Python: Take your code to the next level, Overland 
2.  Learning Python, Mark Lutz, O'reilly 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Python Programming: A Modern Approach, Vamsi Kurama, Pearson 
2.  Python  Programming  A  Modular  Approach  with  Graphics,  Database,  Mobile,  and  Web 
Applications, Sheetal Taneja, Naveen Kumar, Pearson 
3.  Introduction to Python Programming, Gowrishakar S, Veena A, CRC Press 
4.  Programming with Python, A User’s Book, Michael Dawson, Cengage Learning, India Edition 
5.  Python for Data Science, Dr. Mohd Abdul Hameed, Wiley publications 
6.  Core Python Programming, Dr. R. Nageswara Rao, Dreamtech press 
7.  Introduction to Python, Gowrishankar S, Veena A., CRC Press 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
MA401BS: MATHEMATICAL AND STATISTICAL FOUNDATIONS 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Pre-requisites: Mathematics courses of first year of study. 
Objectives: To learn 
1.  The Number Theory basic concepts useful for cryptography etc.  
2.  The theory of Probability, and probability distributions of single random variables.  
3.  The sampling theory and testing of hypothesis and making inferences. 
4.  The curve fitting, correlation and regression for the given data. 
 
Course outcomes: After learning the contents of this paper, the student must be able to 
1.  Apply the number theory concepts to cryptography domain. 
2.  Apply the concepts of probability and distributions to some case studies.  
3.  Correlate the material of one unit to the material in other units. 
4.  Resolve the potential misconceptions and hazards in each topic of study.  
5. Fit the curve, correlation and regression for the given data. 
 
UNIT-I: Basics of Number Theory                                                                                10 L 
Greatest  Common  Divisors  and  Prime  Factorization:  Greatest  common  divisors  –  The  Euclidean 
algorithm – The fundamental theorem of arithmetic – Factorization of integers and the Fermat numbers. 
Congruences: Introduction to congruences – Linear congruences. 
 
UNIT-II: Random Variables and Probability Distributions                                        8 L 
Concept  of  a  Random  Variable  –  Discrete  Probability  Distributions  –  Continuous  Probability 
Distributions – Mean of a Random Variable – Variance of a Random Variable  
Discrete Probability Distributions: Binomial Distribution – Poisson distribution 
 
UNIT-III: Continuous Distributions and Sampling                                                    10 L 
Uniform Distribution – Normal Distribution – Areas under the Normal Curve – Applications of the Normal 
Distribution  –  Normal  Approximation  to  the  Binomial  Distributions. Fundamental  Sampling 
Distributions: Random Sampling – Some Important Statistics – Sampling Distributions – Sampling 
Distribution of Means – Central Limit Theorem. 
 
UNIT-IV: Tests of Hypotheses (Large and Small Samples)                                       10 L 
Statistical Hypotheses: General Concepts – Testing  a Statistical Hypothesis. Single sample: Tests 
concerning  a  single  mean.  Two  samples:  Tests  on  two  mean  (Unknown for  equal variance).  One 
sample:  Test  on  a  single  proportion.  Two  samples:  Tests  on  two  proportions.  Two-  sample  tests 
concerning variances: F-distribution 
 
UNIT-V: Applied Statistics                                                                                            10 L 
Curve fitting by the method of least squares – Fitting of straight lines – Second degree parabolas and 
more general curves – Correlation and Regression – Rank correlation. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Kenneth  H.  Rosen,  Elementary  Number  Theory  &  its  Applications,  sixth  edition,  Addison 
Wesley, ISBN 978 0-321-50031-1. 
2.  Ronald E. Walpole, Raymond H. Myers, Sharon L. Myers, Keying Ye, Probability & Statistics 
for Engineers & Scientists, 9
th
 Ed. Pearson Publishers. 
3.  S C Gupta and V K Kapoor, Fundamentals of Mathematical Statistics, Khanna publications. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  T.T. Soong, Fundamentals of Probability and Statistics for Engineers, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 
2004. 
2.  Sheldon M Ross, Probability and statistics for Engineers and scientists, academic press. 
3. S C Gupta and V K Kapoor, Fundamentals of Mathematical statistics, Khanna publications. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS302PC: COMPUTER ORGANIZATION AND ARCHITECTURE 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Prerequisites: No prerequisites. 
Co-requisite: A Course on “Digital Electronics”. 
 
Course Objectives: 
   The purpose of the course is to introduce principles of computer organization and the basic 
architectural concepts. 
   It begins with basic organization, design, and programming of a simple digital computer and 
introduces simple register transfer language to specify various computer operations. 
   Topics  include  computer  arithmetic,  instruction  set  design,  microprogrammed  control  unit, 
pipelining and vector processing, memory organization and I/O systems, and multiprocessors 
 
Course Outcomes: 
   Understand the basics of instruction sets and their impact on processor design. 
   Demonstrate an understanding of the design of the functional units of a digital computer system. 
   Evaluate cost performance and design trade-offs in designing and constructing a computer 
processor including memory. 
   Design a pipeline for consistent execution of instructions with minimum hazards. 
   Recognize and manipulate representations of numbers stored in digital computers 
 
UNIT - I: 
Boolean Algebra and Logic Gates: Binary codes, Binary Storage and Registers, Binary logic.  
Digital logic gates. Data Representation: Data types, Complements, Fixed Point Representation, 
Floating Point Representation 
Digital  Computers:  Introduction,  Block  diagram  of  Digital  Computer,  Definition  of  Computer 
Organization, Computer Design and Computer Architecture. 
 
UNIT - II: 
Combinational Logic: Combinational Circuits, Analysis procedure Design procedure, Binary Adder-
Subtractor Decimal Adder, Binary multiplier, magnitude comparator, Decoders, Encoders, Multiplexers, 
HDL for combinational circuits. 
Sequential Logic: Sequential circuits, latches, Flip-Flops Analysis of clocked sequential circuits, state 
Reduction  and  Assignment,  Design  Procedure. Registers,  shift  Registers,  Ripple  counters, 
synchronous counters, other counters. 
 
UNIT III 
Register Transfer Language and Micro operations: Register Transfer language, Register Transfer, 
Bus and memory transfers, Arithmetic Micro operations, logic micro operations, shift micro operations, 
Arithmetic logic shift unit. 
Basic  Computer  Organization  and  Design:  Instruction  codes,  Computer  Registers  Computer 
instructions, Timing and Control, Instruction cycle, Memory Reference Instructions, Input – Output and 
Interrupt. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Microprogrammed Control: Control memory, Address sequencing, micro program example, design 
of control unit. 
Central Processing Unit: General Register Organization, Instruction Formats, Addressing modes, 
Data Transfer and Manipulation, Program Control. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Computer  Arithmetic:  Addition  and  subtraction,  multiplication  Algorithms,  Division  Algorithms, 
Floating – point Arithmetic operations. Decimal Arithmetic unit, Decimal Arithmetic operations.  
 
UNIT - V 
Input-Output Organization: Input-Output Interface, Asynchronous data transfer, Modes of Transfer, 
Priority Interrupt Direct memory Access. 
Memory  Organization:  Memory  Hierarchy,  Main  Memory,  Auxiliary  memory,  Associate  Memory, 
Cache Memory. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Digital Design – M. Morris Mano, Third Edition, Pearson/PHI. 
2.  Computer System Architecture – M. Morris Mano, Third Edition, Pearson/PHI. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Switching and Finite Automata Theory, ZVI. Kohavi, Tata Mc Graw Hill.  
2.  Computer Organization – Carl Hamacher, Zvonks Vranesic, SafeaZaky, 5th Edition, McGraw 
Hill. 
3.  Computer Organization and Architecture – William Stallings Sixth Edition, Pearson/PHI. 
4.  Structured Computer Organization – Andrew S. Tanenbaum, 4th Edition, PHI/Pearson. 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS303PC: OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING THROUGH JAVA 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To Understand the basic object-oriented programming concepts and apply them in problem 
solving. 
2.  To Illustrate inheritance concepts for reusing the program.  
3.  To Demonstrate multitasking by using multiple threads and event handling 
4.  To Develop data-centric applications using JDBC.  
5.  To Understand the basics of java console and GUI based programming 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Demonstrate the behavior of programs involving the basic programming constructs like control 
structures, constructors, string handling and garbage collection. 
2.  Demonstrate the implementation of inheritance (multilevel, hierarchical and multiple) by using 
extend and implement keywords 
3.  Use multithreading concepts to develop inter process communication. 
4.  Understand the process of graphical user interface design and implementation using AWT or 
swings. 
5.  Develop applets that interact abundantly with the client environment and deploy on the server. 
 
UNIT - I 
Object oriented thinking and Java Basics- Need for oop paradigm, summary of oop concepts, coping 
with  complexity,  abstraction  mechanisms.  History  of  Java,  Java  buzzwords,  data  types,  variables, 
scope and lifetime of variables, arrays, operators, expressions, control statements, type conversion and 
casting, simple java program, concepts of classes, objects, constructors, methods, access control, this 
keyword, garbage collection, overloading methods and constructors, parameter passing, recursion, 
nested and inner classes, exploring String class. 
 
UNIT - II 
Inheritance, Packages and Interfaces – Hierarchical abstractions, Base class object, subclass, subtype, 
substitutability,  forms  of  inheritance  specialization,  specification,  construction,  extension,  limitation, 
combination, benefits of inheritance, costs of inheritance. Member access rules, super keyword uses, 
using final keyword with inheritance, polymorphism- method overriding, abstract classes, the Object 
class. Defining, Creating and Accessing a Package, Understanding CLASSPATH, importing packages, 
differences between classes and interfaces, defining an interface, implementing interface, applying 
interfaces, variables in interface and extending interfaces. 
 
UNIT - III 
Exception  handling  and  Multithreading--  Concepts  of  exception  handling,  benefits  of  exception 
handling, Termination or resumptive models, exception hierarchy, usage of try, catch, throw, throws 
and finally, built in exceptions, creating own exception subclasses. Differences between multithreading 
and multitasking, thread life cycle, creating threads, thread priorities, synchronizing threads, inter thread 
communication, thread groups, daemon threads. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Exploring String class, Object class, Exploring java.util package, Exploring java.io package 
Event  Handling:  Events,  Event  sources,  Event  classes,  Event  Listeners,  Delegation  event  model, 
handling mouse and keyboard events, Adapter classes. graphics, layout manager – layout manager 
types – border, grid, flow, card and grid bag. 
 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
UNIT - V 
Swing – Introduction, limitations of AWT, MVC architecture, components, containers, exploring swing- 
JFrame and JComponent, JLabel, ImageIcon, JTextField, JButton, JCheckBox, JRadioButton, JList, 
JComboBox, Tabbed Panes, Scroll Panes, Trees, and Tables. Menu Basics, Menu related classes - 
JMenuBar, JMenu, JMenuItem, JCheckBoxMenuItem, JRadioButtonMenuItem, JSeperator. creating a 
popup menu 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.     Java the complete reference, 13th edition, Herbert schildt, Dr. Denny Coward, Mc Graw Hill. 
2.      Understanding OOP with Java, updated edition, T. Budd, Pearson education. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  An Introduction to programming and OO design using Java, J.Nino and F.A. Hosch, John Wiley 
& sons. 
2.  An Introduction to OOP, third edition, T. Budd, Pearson education. 
3.  Introduction to Java programming, Y. Daniel Liang, Pearson education. 
4.  An  introduction  to  Java  programming  and  object-oriented  application  development,  R.A. 
Johnson- Thomson. 
5.  Core  Java  2,  Vol  1,  Fundamentals,  Cay.S.  Horstmann  and  Gary  Cornell,  eighth  Edition, 
Pearson Education. 
6.  Core Java 2, Vol 2, Advanced Features, Cay.S. Horstmann and Gary Cornell, eighth Edition, 
Pearson Education 
7.  Object Oriented Programming with Java, R.Buyya, S.T.Selvi, X.Chu, TMH. 
8.  Java and Object Orientation, an introduction, John Hunt, second edition, Springer.  
9.  Maurach’s Beginning Java2 JDK 5, SPD. 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS304PC: SOFTWARE ENGINEERING 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.           L   T     P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Course Objectives 
   The aim of the course is to provide an understanding of the working knowledge of the 
techniques for estimation, design, testing and quality management of large software 
development projects. 
   Topics include process models, software requirements, software design, software testing, 
software process/product metrics, risk management, quality management and UML diagrams 
 
Course Outcomes 
   Ability to translate end-user requirements into system and software requirements, using e.g. 
   UML, and structure the requirements in a Software Requirements Document (SRD). 
   Identify and apply appropriate software architectures and patterns to carry out high level design 
of a system and be able to critically compare alternative choices. 
   Will have experience and/or awareness of testing problems and will be able to develop a simple 
testing report 
 
UNIT - I 
Introduction  to  Software  Engineering:  The  evolving  role  of  software,  changing  nature  of  software, 
software myths. A Generic view of process: Software engineering- a layered technology, a process 
framework, the capability maturity model integration (CMMI). Process models: The waterfall model, 
Spiral model, Incremental Process Models, Concurrent Models, Component based development and 
Agile Development. 
 
UNIT - II 
Software  Requirements:  Functional  and  non-functional  requirements,  user  requirements,  system 
requirements, interface specification, the software requirements document. 
Requirements  engineering  process:  Feasibility  studies,  requirements  elicitation  and  analysis, 
requirements validation, requirements management. 
 
UNIT - III 
Design Engineering: Design process and design quality, design concepts, the design model. 
Creating an architectural design: software architecture, data design, architectural styles and patterns, 
architectural design, conceptual model of UML, basic structural modeling, use case diagrams, class 
diagrams, sequence diagrams, collaboration diagrams, activity diagrams and component diagrams. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Testing Strategies: A strategic approach to software testing, test strategies for conventional software, 
black-box and white-box testing, validation testing, system testing, the art of debugging. 
Metrics for Process and Products: Software measurement, metrics for software quality. 
 
UNIT - V 
Risk  management:  Reactive  Vs  proactive  risk  strategies,  software  risks,  risk  identification,  risk 
projection, risk refinement, RMMM. Quality Management: Quality concepts, software quality assurance, 
software reviews, formal technical reviews, statistical software quality assurance, software reliability, 
the ISO 9000 quality standards. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Software Engineering, A practitioner’s Approach- Roger S. Pressman, 6th edition, McGraw Hill 
International Edition. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
2.  Software Engineering- Sommerville, 7th edition, Pearson Education. 
3.  The unified modeling language user guide, Grady Booch, James Rumbaugh, Ivar Jacobson, 
Pearson Education. 
  
 REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Software Engineering, an Engineering approach- James F. Peters, Witold Pedrycz, John Wiley. 
2.  Software  Engineering  principles  and  practice-  Waman  S  Jawadekar,  The  McGraw-Hill 
Companies. 
3.  Fundamentals of object-oriented design using UML Meiler page-Jones: Pearson Education. 
4.  Fundamentals of Software Engineering-Rajib Mall, PHI. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS305PC: DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.           L   T     P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Prerequisites: A course on “Data Structures”. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To understand the basic concepts and the applications of database systems. 
2.  To master the basics of SQL and construct queries using SQL. 
3.  Topics include data models, database design, relational model, relational algebra, transaction 
control, concurrency control, storage structures and access techniques. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Gain knowledge of fundamentals of DBMS, database design and normal forms 
2.  Master the basics of SQL for retrieval and management of data. 
3.   Be acquainted with the basics of transaction processing and concurrency control. 
4.  Familiarity with database storage structures and access techniques 
 
UNIT - I 
Database System Applications: A Historical Perspective, File Systems versus a DBMS, the Data 
Model, Levels of Abstraction in a DBMS, Data Independence, Structure of a DBMS 
Introduction to Database Design: Database Design and ER Diagrams, Entities, Attributes, and Entity 
Sets, Relationships and Relationship Sets, Additional Features of the ER Model, Conceptual Design 
With the ER Model 
 
UNIT - II 
Introduction  to  the  Relational  Model:  Integrity  constraint  over  relations,  enforcing  integrity 
constraints, querying relational data, logical database design, introduction to views, destroying/altering 
tables and views. 
Relational Algebra, Tuple relational Calculus, Domain relational calculus. 
 
UNIT - III 
SQL: QUERIES, CONSTRAINTS, TRIGGERS: form of basic SQL query, UNION, INTERSECT, and 
EXCEPT, Nested Queries, aggregation operators, NULL values, complex integrity constraints in SQL, 
triggers and active databases. 
Schema  Refinement:  Problems  caused  by  redundancy,  decompositions,  problems  related  to 
decomposition,  reasoning  about  functional  dependencies,  FIRST,  SECOND,  THIRD  normal forms, 
BCNF, lossless join decomposition, multivalued dependencies, FOURTH normal form, FIFTH normal 
form. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Transaction  Concept,  Transaction  State,  Implementation  of  Atomicity  and  Durability,  Concurrent 
Executions, Serializability, Recoverability, Implementation of Isolation, Testing for serializability, Lock 
Based  Protocols,  Timestamp  Based  Protocols,  Validation-  Based  Protocols,  Multiple  Granularity, 
Recovery and Atomicity, Log–Based Recovery, Recovery with Concurrent Transactions. 
 
UNIT - V 
Data on External Storage, File Organization and Indexing, Cluster Indexes, Primary and Secondary 
Indexes,  Index  data  Structures,  Hash  Based  Indexing,  Tree  based  Indexing,  Comparison  of  File 
Organizations, Indexes- Intuitions for tree Indexes, Indexed Sequential Access Methods (ISAM),  
B+ Trees: A Dynamic Index Structure. 
 
 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Database System Concepts, Silberschatz, Korth, McGraw hill, V edition.3rd Edition 
2.  Database Management Systems, Raghurama Krishnan, Johannes Gehrke, Tata Mc Graw Hill 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Database Systems design, Implementation, and Management, Peter Rob & Carlos Coronel 7
th
 
Edition. 
2.  Fundamentals of Database Systems, Elmasri Navrate, Pearson Education 
3.  Introduction to Database Systems, C. J. Date, Pearson Education 
4.  Oracle for Professionals, The X Team, S.Shah and V. Shah, SPD. 
5.  Database Systems Using Oracle: A Simplified guide to SQL and PL/SQL, Shah, PHI. 
6.  Fundamentals of Database Management Systems, M. L. Gillenson, Wiley Student Edition. 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
MA306PC: COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS LAB 
(Using Python/MATLAB software) 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.                                                                                                         L   T  P  C 
                                                                                                                                             0   0   2  1 
Pre-requisites: Matrices, Iterative methods and ordinary differential equations 
 
Course Objectives: To learn 
1. Solve problems of Eigen values and Eigen Vectors using Python/MATLAB. 
2. Solution of Algebraic and Transcendental Equations using Python/MATLAB 
3. Solve problems of Linear system of equations 
4. Solve  problems  of First-Order  ODEs  Higher  order  linear  differential  equations  with 
constant coefficients        
 
Course outcomes: After learning the contents of this paper, the student must be able to 
1. Develop the code to find the Eigen values and Eigen Vectors using Python/MATLAB. 
2. Develop the code find solution of Algebraic and Transcendental Equations and Linear system 
of equations using Python/MATLAB 
3. Write  the  code  to  solve  problems  of First-Order  ODEs  Higher  order  linear  differential 
equations with constant coefficients   
 
* Visualize all solutions Graphically through programmes 
 
UNIT - I: Eigen values and Eigenvectors:          6P 
Programs:  
   Finding real and complex Eigen values. 
   Finding Eigen vectors. 
 
UNIT-II:  Solution of Algebraic and Transcendental Equations    6P 
Bisection method, Newton Raphson Method 
Programs:  
   Root of a given equation using Bisection method. 
   Root of a given equation Newton Raphson Method. 
 
UNIT-III: Linear system of equations:         6P 
Jacobi’s iteration method and Gauss-Seidal iteration method 
Programs: 
   Solution of given system of linear equations using Jacobi’s method  
   Solution of given system of linear equations using Gauss-Seidal method  
 
UNIT-IV: First-Order ODEs           8P 
Exact and non-exact equations, Applications: exponential growth/decay, Newton's law of cooling. 
Programs: 
   Solving exact and non-exact equations 
   Solving exponential growth/decay and Newton's law of cooling problems 
 
UNIT-V: Higher order linear differential equations with constant coefficients   6P 
Programs: 
   Solving homogeneous ODEs 
   Solving non-homogeneous ODEs 
 
 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  MATLAB and its Applications in Engineering, Rajkumar Basal, Ashok Kumar Geo, Manoj Kumar 
Sharma, Pearson publication. 
2.  Kenneth A. Lambert, The fundamentals of Python: First Programs, 2011, Cengage Learnings. 
3.  Think Python First Edition, by Allen B. Downey, Orielly publishing. 
4.  Introduction to Python Programming, William Mitchell, Povel Solin, Martin Novak et al., NCLab 
Public Computing, 2012. 
5.  Introduction to Python Programming, ©Jacob Fredslund, 2007. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  An Introduction to Python, John C. Lusth, The University of Alabama, 2011. 
2.  Introduction to Python, ©Dave Kuhlman, 2008. 
 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS307PC: OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING THROUGH JAVA LAB 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.           L   T     P   C 
0    0    2   1 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.   To write programs using abstract classes. 
2.   To write programs for solving real world problems using the java collection framework. 
3.   To write multithreaded programs. 
4.   To write GUI programs using swing controls in Java. 
5.   To introduce java compiler and eclipse platform. 
6.   To impart hands-on experience with java programming. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.   Able to write programs for solving real world problems using the java collection framework. 
2.   Able to write programs using abstract classes. 
3.   Able to write multithreaded programs. 
4.   Able to write GUI programs using swing controls in Java. 
 
Note: 
1. Use LINUX and MySQL for the Lab Experiments. Though not mandatory, encourage the use 
of the Eclipse platform. 
 
2. The list suggests the minimum program set. Hence, the concerned staff is requested to add 
more problems to the list as needed. 
 
List of Experiments: 
1.  Use Eclipse or Net bean platform and acquaint yourself with the various menus. Create a test 
project, add a test class, and run it. See how you can use auto suggestions, auto fill. Try code 
formatter and code refactoring like renaming variables, methods, and classes. Try debug step 
by step with a small program of about 10 to 15 lines which contains at least one if else condition 
and a for loop. 
 
2.  Write a Java program that works as a simple calculator. Use a grid layout to arrange buttons 
for the digits and for the +, -,*, % operations. Add a text field to display the result. Handle any 
possible exceptions like divided by zero. 
 
3.   
A)  Develop an applet in Java that displays a simple message. 
B)  Develop an applet in Java that receives an integer in one text field, and computes its 
factorial 
 
4.  Value and returns it in another text field, when the button named “Compute” is clicked. 
 
5.  Write a Java program that creates a user interface to perform integer divisions. The user enters 
two numbers in the text fields, Num1 and Num2. The division of Num1 and Num 2 is displayed 
in the Result field when the Divide button is clicked. If Num1 or Num2 were not an integer, the 
program would throw a Number Format Exception. If Num2 were Zero, the program would 
throw an Arithmetic Exception. Display the exception in a message dialog box. 
 
6.  Write a Java program that implements a multi-thread application that has three threads. First 
thread generates a random integer every 1 second and if the value is even, the second thread 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
computes the square of the number and prints. If the value is odd, the third thread will print the 
value of the cube of the number. 
 
7.  Write a Java program for the following: 
Create a doubly linked list of elements. 
Delete a given element from the above list. 
Display the contents of the list after deletion. 
 
8.  Write a Java program that simulates a traffic light. The program lets the user select one of three 
lights: red, yellow, or green with radio buttons. On selecting a button, an appropriate message 
with “Stop” or “Ready” or “Go” should appear above the buttons in the selected color. Initially, 
there is no message shown. 
 
9.  Write a Java program to create an abstract class named Shape that contains two integers and 
an empty method named print Area (). Provide three classes named Rectangle, Triangle, and 
Circle such that each one of the classes extends the class Shape. Each one of the classes 
contains only the method print Area () that prints the area of the given shape. 
 
10. Suppose that a table named Table.txt is stored in a text file. The first line in the file is the header, 
and  the  remaining  lines  correspond  to  rows  in  the  table.  The  elements  are  separated  by 
commas. 
11. Write a java program to display the table using Labels in Grid Layout. 
 
12. Write a Java program that handles all mouse events and shows the event name at the center 
of the window when a mouse event is fired (Use Adapter classes). 
 
13. Write a Java program that loads names and phone numbers from a text file where the data is 
14. organized as one line per record and each field in a record are separated by a tab (\t). It takes 
a 
15. name or phone number as input and prints the corresponding other value from the hash table 
(hint: 
16. use hash tables). 
 
17. Write a Java program that correctly implements the producer – consumer problem using the 
18. concept of inter thread communication. 
 
19. Write a Java program to list all the files in a directory including the files present in all its 
20. subdirectories. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Java for Programmers, P. J. Deitel and H. M. Deitel, 10th Edition Pearson education. 
2.  Thinking in Java, Bruce Eckel, Pearson Education. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS 
1.  Java Programming, D. S. Malik and P. S. Nair, Cengage Learning. 
2.  Core Java, Volume 1, 9th edition, Cay S. Horstmann and G Cornell, Pearson. 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS308PC: SOFTWARE ENGINEERING LAB 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.           L   T     P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Prerequisites: A course on “Programming for Problem Solving”. 
Co-requisite: A Course on “Software Engineering”. 
 
Course Objectives: 
   To  have  hands-on  experience  in  developing  a  software  project  by  using  various  software 
engineering principles and methods in each of the phases of software development. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
   Ability to translate end-user requirements into system and software requirements 
   Ability to generate a high-level design of the system from the software requirements 
   Will have experience and/or awareness of testing problems and will be able to develop a simple 
testing report 
 
List of Experiments 
Do the following seven exercises for any two projects given in the list of sample projects or any other 
Projects: 
1.  Development of problem statements. 
2.  Preparation of Software Requirement Specification Document, Design Documents and Testing 
Phase related documents. 
3.  Preparation of Software Configuration Management and Risk Management related documents. 
4.  Study and usage of any Design phase CASE tool 
5.  Performing the Design by using any Design phase CASE tools. 
6.  Develop test cases for unit testing and integration testing 
7.  Develop test cases for various white box and black box testing techniques. 
 
Sample Projects: 
1.  Passport automation System 
2.  Book Bank 
3.  Online Exam Registration 
4.  Stock Maintenance System 
5.  Online course reservation system 
6.  E-ticketing 
7.  Software Personnel Management System 
8.  Credit Card Processing 
9.  E-book management System. 
10. Recruitment system 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Software Engineering, A practitioner’s Approach- Roger S. Pressman, 6th edition, McGraw Hill 
International Edition. 
2.  Software Engineering- Sommerville, 7th edition, Pearson Education. 
3.  The unified modeling language user guide Grady Booch, James Rambaugh, Ivar Jacobson, 
Pearson Education. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Software Engineering, an Engineering approach- James F. Peters, Witold Pedrycz, John Wiley. 
2.  Software Engineering principles and practice- Waman S Jawadekar, The McGraw-Hill 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS309PC: DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS LAB 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
 Course Objectives: 
   Introduce ER data model, database design and normalization 
   Learn SQL basics for data definition and data manipulation 
 
Course Outcomes: 
   Design database schema for a given application and apply normalization 
    Acquire skills in using SQL commands for data definition and data manipulation. 
    Develop solutions for database applications using procedures, cursors and triggers 
 
List of Experiments: 
1.  Concept design with E-R Model 
2.  Relational Model 
3.  Normalization 
4.  Practicing DDL commands 
5.  Practicing DML commands 
6.  A) Querying (using ANY, ALL, UNION, INTERSECT, JOIN, Constraints etc.) B) Nested, 
Correlated subqueries 
7.  Queries using Aggregate functions, GROUP BY, HAVING and Creation and dropping of 
Views. 
8.  Triggers (Creation of insert trigger, delete trigger, update trigger) 
9.  Procedures 
10. Usage of Cursors 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Database  Management  Systems,  Raghurama  Krishnan,  Johannes  Gehrke,  Tata  Mc  Graw 
Hill,3rd Edition 
2.  Database System Concepts, Silberschatz, Korth, McGraw Hill, V edition. 
 
REFERENCES BOOKS: 
1.  Database Systems design, Implementation, and Management, Peter Rob & Carlos Coronel 
7
th
 Edition. 
2.  Fundamentals of Database Systems, Elmasri Navrate, Pearson Education 
3.  Introduction to Database Systems, C.J. Date, Pearson Education 
4.  Oracle for Professionals, The X Team, S. Shah and V. Shah, SPD. 
5.  Database Systems Using Oracle: A Simplified guide to SQL and PL/SQL, Shah, PHI. 
6.  Fundamentals of Database Management Systems, M. L. Gillenson, Wiley Student Edition. 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS310SD: NODE JS/ REACT JS/ DJANGO 
 
B.Tech. II Year I Sem.          L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming through Java, HTML Basics. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To implement the static web pages using HTML and do client-side validation using JavaScript. 
2.  To design and work with databases using Java 
3.  To develop an end to end application using java full stack. 
4.  To introduce Node JS implementation for server-side programming. 
5.  To experiment with single page application development using React. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student will be able to, 
1.  Build a custom website with HTML, CSS, and Bootstrap and little JavaScript. 
2.  Demonstrate Advanced features of JavaScript and learn about JDBC 
3.  Develop Server – side implementation using Java technologies like 
4.  Develop the server – side implementation using Node JS. 
5.  Design a Single Page Application using React. 
 
Exercises: 
1.  Build a responsive web application for shopping cart with registration, login, catalog and cart 
pages using CSS3 features, flex and grid. 
2.  Make the above web application responsive web application using Bootstrap framework. 
3.  Use JavaScript for doing client – side validation of the pages implemented in experiment 1 and 
experiment 2. 
4.  Explore the features of ES6 like arrow functions, callbacks, promises, async/await. Implement 
an application for reading the weather information from openweathermap.org and display the 
information in the form of a graph on the web page. 
5.  Develop a java stand alone application that connects with the database (Oracle / mySql) and 
perform the CRUD operation on the database tables. 
6.  Create an xml for the bookstore. Validate the same using both DTD and XSD. 
7.  Design  a  controller  with  servlet  that  provides  the  interaction  with  application  developed  in 
experiment 1 and the database created in experiment 5. 
8.  Maintaining the transactional history of any user is very important. Explore the various session 
tracking mechanism (Cookies, HTTP Session) 
9.  Create a custom server using http module and explore the other modules of Node JS like OS, 
path, event. 
10. Develop  an  express  web  application  that  can  interact  with  REST  API  to  perform  CRUD 
operations on student data. (Use Postman) 
11. For the above application create authorized end points using JWT (JSON Web Token). 
12. Create  a  react  application  for  the  student  management  system  having  registration,  login, 
contact, about pages and implement routing to navigate through these pages. 
13. Create a service in react that fetches the weather information from openweathermap.org and 
the display the current and historical weather information using graphical representation using 
chart.js 
14. Create a TODO application in react with necessary components and deploy it into GitHub. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Jon Duckett, Beginning HTML, XHTML, CSS, and JavaScript, Wrox Publications, 2010. 
2.  Bryan Basham, Kathy Sierra and Bert Bates, Head First Servlets and JSP, O’Reilly Media, 2nd 
Edition, 2008. 
3.  Vasan  Subramanian,  Pro  MERN  Stack,  Full  Stack  Web  App  Development  with  Mongo, 
Express, React, and Node ,2nd Edition, APress.  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS401PC: DISCRETE MATHEMATICS 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.         L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Course Objectives:  
1.  Introduces elementary discrete mathematics for computer science and engineering. 
2.  Topics  include  formal logic  notation,  methods of  proof,  induction,  sets,  relations,  algebraic 
structures,  elementary  graph  theory,  permutations  and  combinations,  counting  principles; 
recurrence relations and generating functions. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
1.  Understand and construct precise mathematical proofs  
2.  Apply logic and set theory to formulate precise statements  
3.  Analyze and solve counting problems on finite and discrete structures  
4.  Describe and manipulate sequences  
5.  Apply graph theory in solving computing problems 
 
UNIT - I 
Mathematical logic:  Introduction,  Statements  and  Notation,  Connectives,  Normal Forms, Theory  of 
Inference  for  the  Statement  Calculus,  The  Predicate  Calculus,  Inference  Theory  of  the  Predicate 
Calculus. 
 
UNIT - II 
Set  theory:  Introduction,  Basic  Concepts  of  Set  Theory,  Representation  of  Discrete  Structures, 
Relations and Ordering, Functions. 
 
UNIT - III 
Algebraic Structures: Introduction, Algebraic Systems, Semi groups and Monoids, Lattices as Partially 
Ordered Sets, Boolean Algebra. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Elementary Combinatorics: Basics of Counting, Combinations and Permutations, Enumeration of 
Combinations  and  Permutations,  Enumerating  Combinations  and  Permutations  with  Repetitions, 
Enumerating  Permutation  with  Constrained  Repetitions,  Binomial  Coefficient,  The  Binomial  and 
Multinomial Theorems, The Principle of Exclusion. 
 
UNIT - V 
Graph Theory: Basic Concepts, Isomorphism and Subgraphs, Trees and their Properties, Spanning 
Trees, Directed Trees, Binary Trees, Planar Graphs, Euler’s Formula, Multi-graphs and Euler Circuits, 
Hamiltonian Graphs, Chromatic Numbers, The Four-Color Problem. 
 
TEXT BOOKS:  
1.  Discrete Mathematical Structures with Applications to Computer Science: J.P. Tremblay, R. 
Manohar, McGraw-Hill, 1st ed.  
2.  Discrete Mathematics for Computer Scientists & Mathematicians: Joe l. Mott, Abraham Kandel, 
Teodore P. Baker, Prentis Hall of India, 2nd ed.  
 
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1.  Discrete  and  Combinatorial  Mathematics  -  an  applied  introduction:  Ralph.  P.  Grimald, 
Pearson education, 5
th
 edition. 
2.  Discrete Mathematical Structures: Thomas Kosy, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing co. 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS402PC: OPERATING SYSTEMS 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.         L   T    P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Prerequisites: 
1.   A course on “Computer Programming and Data Structures”. 
2.   A course on “Computer Organization and Architecture”. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  Introduce operating system concepts (i.e., processes, threads, scheduling, synchronization, 
deadlocks, memory management, file and I/O subsystems and protection) 
2.  Introduce the issues to be considered in the design and development of operating system 
3.  Introduce basic Unix commands, system call interface for process management, interprocess 
communication and I/O in Unix 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Will be able to control access to a computer and the files that may be shared 
2.  Demonstrate the knowledge of the components of computers and their respective roles in 
computing. 
3.  Ability to recognize and resolve user problems with standard operating environments. 
4.  Gain  practical  knowledge  of  how  programming  languages,  operating  systems,  and 
architectures interact and how to use each effectively. 
 
UNIT - I 
Operating  System  -  Introduction,  Structures  -  Simple  Batch,  Multiprogrammed,  Time-shared, 
Personal  Computer,  Parallel,  Distributed  Systems,  Real-Time  Systems,  System  components, 
Operating System services, System Calls 
Process  - Process  concepts  and  scheduling,  Operations  on  processes,  Cooperating  Processes, 
Threads 
 
UNIT - II 
CPU  Scheduling -  Scheduling  Criteria,  Scheduling  Algorithms,  Multiple  -Processor  Scheduling. 
System call interface for process management-fork, exit, wait, waitpid, exec 
Deadlocks - System Model, Deadlocks Characterization, Methods for Handling Deadlocks, Deadlock 
Prevention, Deadlock Avoidance, Deadlock Detection, and Recovery from Deadlock 
 
UNIT - III 
Process  Management  and  Synchronization  -  The  Critical  Section  Problem,  Synchronization 
Hardware, Semaphores, and Classical Problems of Synchronization, Critical Regions, Monitors 
Interprocess Communication Mechanisms: IPC between processes on a single computer system, 
IPC between processes on different systems, using pipes, FIFOs, message queues, shared memory. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Memory Management and Virtual Memory - Logical versus Physical Address Space, Swapping, 
Contiguous  Allocation,  Paging,  Segmentation,  Segmentation  with  Paging,  Demand  Paging,  Page 
Replacement, Page Replacement Algorithms. 
 
UNIT - V 
File System Interface and Operations -Access methods, Directory Structure, Protection, File System 
Structure, Allocation methods, Free-space Management. Usage of open, create, read, write, close, 
lseek, stat, ioctl system calls. 
 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Operating System Principles- Abraham Silberchatz, Peter B. Galvin, Greg Gagne 7th Edition, 
John Wiley 
2.  Advanced programming in the UNIX environment, W.R. Stevens, Pearson education. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Operating Systems- Internals and Design Principles, William Stallings, Fifth Edition–2005, 
Pearson Education/PHI 
2.  Operating System A Design Approach- Crowley, TMH. 
3.  Modern Operating Systems, Andrew S. Tanenbaum 2nd edition, Pearson/PHI 
4.  UNIX programming environment, Kernighan and Pike, PHI/ Pearson Education 
5.  UNIX Internals -The New Frontiers, U. Vahalia, Pearson Education. 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS403PC: ALGORITHMS DESIGN AND ANALYSIS 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.          L   T     P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Prerequisites: Programming for problem solving and Data Structures 
 
Course Objectives 
1.  Develop  proficiency  in  evaluating  algorithms  using  asymptotic  notations,  including  best-, 
average-, and worst-case time/space complexities, and solving related recurrence relations. 
2.  Master  various  algorithmic  strategies—divide-and-conquer,  greedy,  dynamic  programming, 
backtracking, and branch-and-bound—identifying suitable use cases and demonstrating their 
application. 
3.  Critically  assess  and  contrast  different  algorithms  in  terms  of  efficiency,  scalability,  and 
correctness through rigorous analytical reasoning and empirical evaluation. 
4.  Differentiate  between  tractable  (polynomial-time)  and  intractable  (super-polynomial  or 
exponential-time) problems;  
5. Identify  and  classify  problems  as  P,  NP,  NP-hard,  or  NP-complete,  and assess  their 
relationships through polynomial-time reductions and Cook’s theorem. 
 
Course Outcomes 
1.  Able to Apply space and time complexity analysis using asymptotic notations. 
2.  Able to Design divide-and-conquer algorithms and critically assess their runtime and space 
trade-offs. 
3.  Able to Device backtracking and dynamic programming solutions. 
4.  Able to Apply greedy methods and graph traversal algorithms 
5.  Able to Analyse and Design branch-and-bound algorithms for NP-hard problems  
 
UNIT - I 
Introduction:  Algorithm,  Performance  Analysis-Space  complexity,  Time  complexity,  Asymptotic 
Notations- Big oh notation, Omega notation, Theta notation, and Little oh notation. 
Divide and conquer: General method, applications-Binary search, Quick sort, Merge sort, Strassen’s 
matrix multiplication. 
 
UNIT - II 
Disjoint Sets: Disjoint set operations, union and find algorithms, Priority Queue- Heaps, Heapsort 
Backtracking:  General  method,  applications,  n-queens  problem,  sum  of  subsets  problem,  graph 
coloring, Hamiltonian cycles. 
 
UNIT - III 
Dynamic Programming:  General  method,  applications- Optimal  binary  search  tree,  0/1  knapsack 
problem, All pairs shortest path problem, Traveling salesperson problem, Reliability design. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Greedy method: General method, applications- Job sequencing with deadlines, knapsack problem, 
Minimum cost spanning trees, Single source shortest path problem. 
Basic Traversal and Search Techniques:  Techniques  for  Binary  Trees,  Techniques  for  Graphs, 
Connected components, Biconnected components. 
 
UNIT - V 
Branch and Bound: General method, applications - Travelling salesperson problem, 0/1 knapsack 
problem - LC Branch and Bound solution, FIFO Branch and Bound solution. 
NP-Hard and NP-Complete problems: Basic concepts, non-deterministic algorithms, NP - Hard and 
NP-Complete classes, Cook’s theorem. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
 
TEXT BOOK: 
1.  Fundamentals  of  Computer  Algorithms,  Ellis  Horowitz,  Satraj  Sahni,  and  Rajasekaran, 
University Press. 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Design and Analysis of algorithms, Aho, Ullman, and Hopcroft, Pearson education. 
2.  Introduction to Algorithms, second edition, T. H. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and 
C.Stein, PHI Pvt. Ltd./ Pearson Education. 
3.  Algorithm  Design:  Foundations,  Analysis  and  Internet  Examples,  M.T.  Goodrich  and  R. 
Tamassia, John Wiley and Sons. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS404PC: COMPUTER NETWORKS 
  
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.          L   T     P   C 
3    0    0   3 
Prerequisites 
1.  A course on “Programming for problem solving”. 
2.  A course on “Data Structures”. 
 
Course Objectives 
1.  Equip the students with a general overview of the concepts and fundamentals of computer 
networks. 
2.  Familiarize the students with the standard models for the layered approach to communication 
between machines in a network and the protocols of the various layers. 
3.  Elucidate  the  students about  working  and  implementation  of  protocols at  various  layers  in 
protocols stack. 
4.  Appreciating the protocol working by observing and analysing outputs of the packet sniffer, 
 
Course Outcomes 
1.  Gain the knowledge of the basic computer network technology. 
2.  Gain the knowledge of the functions of each layer in the ISO-OSI and TCP/IP reference model. 
3.  Obtain the skills of subnetting and routing mechanisms. 
4.  Familiarity with the essential protocols of computer networks, and how they can be applied in 
network design and implementation. 
5.  Understanding working of the protocols through traces captured by a packet sniffer 
  
UNIT - I 
Introduction: The  Internet,  Protocol,  Network  Edge,  Access  Networks,  Network  Core,  Packet 
Switching,  Circuit  Switching,  Delay,  Loss,  and  Throughput  in  Packet-Switched  Networks,  Protocol 
reference models: ISO-OSI, TCP/IP, Types of Network attacks, History of Computer Networking and 
the Internet. 
 
UNIT-II 
Application Layer: Principles of Network Applications, Network Application Architectures, Processes 
Communicating,  Transport  Services  Available  to  Applications,  Transport  Services  Provided  by  the 
Internet, Application-Layer Protocols, The Web and HTTP, File Transfer: FTP, Electronic Mail in the 
Internet, SMTP, DNS, Peer-to-Peer Applications, Socket Programming: Creating Network Applications. 
 
UNIT - III 
Transport  Layer: Transport-Layer  Services,  Multiplexing  and  Demultiplexing,  Connectionless 
Transport:  UDP,  Principles  of  Reliable  Data  Transfer,  Building  a  Reliable  Data  Transfer 
Protocol,   Pipelined  Reliable  Data  Transfer  Protocols,  Go-Back-N  (GBN),  Selective  Repeat  (SR), 
Connection-Oriented  Transport:  TCP,  The  TCP  Connection,  Segment  Structure,  Round-Trip  Time 
Estimation  and  Timeout,  Reliable  Data  Transfer,  Flow  Control,  TCP  Connection  Management, 
Principles of Congestion Control, TCP Congestion Control, Fairness. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Network  Layer:  Data  and  Control  plane, Forwarding  and  Routing  308,  Network  Service 
Models,  Virtual Circuit and Datagram Networks, Router working, The Internet Protocol (IP): Forwarding 
and Addressing in the Internet, Datagram Format, IPv4 Addressing, Internet Control Message Protocol 
(ICMP), IPv6, IP Security, Routing Algorithms- The Link-State (LS) Routing Algorithm, The Distance-
Vector (DV) Routing Algorithm, Hierarchical Routing, Routing in the Internet-Intra-AS Routing in the 
Internet: RIP, Intra-AS Routing in the Internet: OSPF, Inter-AS Routing: BGP, Broadcast and Multicast 
Routing, Broadcast Routing Algorithms, Multicasting. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
 
UNIT - V 
The Link Layer: The Services Provided by the Link Layer, Error-Detection and -Correction Techniques- 
Parity Checks, Checksum Methods, Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC), Hamming code, Multiple Access 
Links  and  Protocols,  Channel  Partitioning  Protocols,  Random  Access  Protocols,  Taking-Turns 
Protocols, DOCSIS: The Link-Layer Protocol for Cable Internet Access, Switched Local Area Networks, 
Link-Layer Addressing and ARP, Ethernet, Link-Layer Switches, Virtual Local Area Networks (VLANs), 
Link Virtualization-Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS), Data Center Networking, A Day in the Life of 
a Web Page Request. Wireless network characteristics, Wireless LAN. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.  Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach – James F.Kurose, Keith W. Ross, Pearson 
2.  Computer Networks -- Andrew S Tanenbaum, David. j. Wetherall, 5th Edition. Pearson/PHI 
 
REFERENCE BOOK: 
1.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan. Third Edition TMH. 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS405PC: MACHINE LEARNING 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.                                                                                                         L   T  P  C 
                                                                                                                                             3   0   0  3 
Course Objectives:  
1.  To introduce students to the basic concepts and techniques of Machine Learning.  
2.  To have a thorough understanding of the Supervised and Unsupervised learning techniques  
3.  To study the various probability-based learning techniques  
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Distinguish between, supervised, unsupervised and semi-supervised learning. 
2.  Understand algorithms for building classifiers applied on datasets of non-linearly separable 
classes 
3.  Design an ensemble model to increase the classification accuracy 
4.  Understand the principles of RL evolutionary computing algorithms     
 
UNIT - I 
Introduction to Machine Learning: Types of Human learning, machine learning process, Well-posed 
learning problem, Types of machine learning and comparison, applications of machine learning. 
Model Preparation, Evaluation and feature engineering: Machine learning activities, Types of data in 
machine learning, dataset understanding, plotting and exploration, checking data quality, remediation, 
data pre-processing, selecting a model, predictive and descriptive models, supervised learning model 
training, cross-validation and boot strapping, lazy vs eager learner, interpreting the model- underfitting, 
overfitting, bias-variance trade-off. Parameter for evaluating performance of classification, regression, 
and clustering model. Improving performance of a model. 
 
UNIT - II 
Feature Engineering: Feature transformation - feature construction, feature extraction by PCA, SVD, 
LDA.  Feature  subset  selection  –  feature  relevancy  and  redundancy  measures.  Feature  selection 
process and approaches. 
Review of Probability concepts:  joint probability, conditional probability, bayes rule, Common discrete 
and  continuous  distributions,  dealing  with  multiple  random  variables,  central  limit  theorem.  Bayes 
classifier, Multi-class Classification, Naïve Bayes classifier, Bayesian belief network. 
  
UNIT - III 
Supervised Learning - Introduction to supervised learning, 
Regression: Introduction of regression, Regression algorithms: Simple linear regression, Multiple linear 
regression, Polynomial regression model, Logistic regression, Maximum likelihood estimation. 
Classification: Classification model and learning steps, Classification algorithms: Naïve Bayes classifier, 
Distance measures, k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN), Decision tree, Support vector machines, Kernel trick, 
Random Forest. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Unsupervised Learning: Introduction to unsupervised learning, Unsupervised vs supervised learning, 
Application of unsupervised learning, Clustering and its types, Partitioning method: k-Means and K-
Medoids, Hierarchical clustering, Density-based methods – DBSCAN. 
 
 UNIT - V 
Artificial  Neural  Network:  Biological  neuron,  Artificial  neuron,  Activation  functions,  neural  network 
architecture, perceptron, learning process in ANN, Back propagation. 
Introduction to deep learning, overview of reinforcement learning, Representation learning, Evolutionary 
learning. Case-study of ML applications: Image recognition, Email spam filtering, Online fraud detection. 
 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
TEXT BOOKS:  
1.  Saikat Dutt, S. Chjandramouli, Das – Machine Learning, Frist Edition, Pearson 
2.  M N Murty, Anathanarayana V S – Machine Learning, First Edition, University Press 
3.  Tom M Mitchell, ―Machine Learning, First Edition, McGraw Hill Education, 2013. 
  
REFERENCE BOOKS:  
1.  Stephen Marsland, ―Machine Learning – An Algorithmic Perspective, Second Edition,  
2.  Chapman and Hall/CRC Machine Learning and Pattern Recognition Series, 2014.  
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
MS406HS: INNOVATION AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.          L   T     P   C 
2    0    0   2 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To familiarize on the basic concepts of innovation, entrepreneurship and its importance.  
2.  To Identify and analyze the process of problem-opportunity identification, market segmentation, 
and idea generation techniques. 
3.  To initiate prototype development and understand minimum viable product. 
4.  To develop initial Business and financial planning and Go-to-Market strategies  
5.  To impart knowledge on establishing startups, venture pitching and IPR 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Understand  the  entrepreneurship  and  the  entrepreneurial  process  and  its  significance  in 
economic development. 
2.  Assess the problem from an industry perspective and generate solutions using the design 
thinking principles. 
3.  Assess market competition, estimate market size, and develop a prototype. 
4.  Analyze Business and financial planning models and Go-to-Market strategies. 
5.  Able to build a start-up, register IP and identify funding opportunities. 
 
Unit I: Fundamentals of Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
Innovation:  Introduction,  need  for  innovation,  Features,  Types  of  innovations,  innovations  in 
manufacturing and service sectors, fostering a culture of innovation, planning for innovation. 
Entrepreneurship: Introduction, types of entrepreneurship attributes, mindset of entrepreneurial and 
intrapreneurial leadership, Role of entrepreneurs in economic development. Woman Entrepreneurship, 
Importance  of  on-campus  startups.  Understanding  to  build  entrepreneurial  mindset,  attributes  and 
networks individuals while on campus.  
Core  Teaching  Tool:  Simulation,  Game,  Industry  Case  Studies  (Personalized  for  students  –  16 
industries to choose from), Venture Activity. 
 
Unit II: Problem and Customer Identification 
Identification of gap, problem, analyzing the problem from a industry perspective, real-world problems, 
market and customer segmentation, validation of customer problem fit, Iterating problem-customer fit, 
Competition and Industry trends mapping and assessing initial opportunity, Porter’s Five Force Model.  
 Idea  generation,  Ideation  techniques:  Brainstorming,  Brain  writing,  Round  robin,  and  SCAMPER, 
Design thinking principles, Mapping of solution to problem. 
Core Teaching Tool: Several types of activities including: Class, game, Gen AI, ‘Get out of the Building’ 
and Venture Activity. 
 
Unit III: Opportunity assessment and Prototype development 
Identify and map global competitors, review industry trends, and understand market sizing: TAM, SAM, 
and SOM. Assessing scope and potential scale for the opportunity. 
Understanding prototyping and Minimum Viable Product (MVP). Developing a prototype: Testing, and 
validation.  
Core Teaching Tool: Venture Activity, no-code Innovation tools, Class activity 
 
Unit IV: Business & Financial Models 
Introduction  to  Business  Model  and  types, Lean Canvas Approach: 9-block lean canvas model, 
building lean canvas for your startup. Business planning: components of Business plan- Sales plan, 
People  plan  and  financial  plan,  Financial  Planning:  Types  of  costs,  preparing  a  financial  plan  for 
profitability using a financial template, understanding the basics of Unit economics, Economies of Scale 
and analyzing financial performance. Go-To-Market (GTM) approach – Selecting the Right Channel, 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
creating digital presence, and building customer acquisition strategy. 
Core Teaching Tool: Founder Case Studies – Sama and Securely Share; Class activity and 
discussions; Venture Activities. 
 
Unit V: Startups and IPR 
Startup  requirements,  building  founding  team  members  and  mentors,  pitch  preparation,  start-up 
registration process, funding opportunities and schemes, institutional support to entrepreneurs, startup 
lifecycle,  documentation,  legal  aspects  in  startup,  venture  pitching  readiness,  National  Innovation 
Startup Policy (NISP) and its features. 
Patents,  Designs,  Patentability,  Procedure  for  grants  of  patents.  Indian  Scenario  of  Patenting, 
International  Scenario:  International  cooperation  on  Intellectual  Property.  Patent  Rights:  Scope  of 
Patent Rights. Copyright, trademark, and GI. Licensing and transfer of technology.  
Core Teaching Tool: Expert talks; Cases; Class activity and discussions; Venture Activities. 
 
Suggested Readings: 
1. John R Bessant, Joe Tidd, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 4E, Wiley, Latest Edition. 
2. Ajay  Batra, The  Stratup  Launch Book- A  Practical Guide for Launching Customer Centric 
Ventures, Wiley, 2020. (For Core Teaching Tool). 
3. Entrepreneurship Development and Small Business Enterprises, Poornima M Charantimath, 
3E, Pearson, 2018.  
4. D.F. Kuratko and T.V. Rao, Entrepreneurship: A South-Asian Perspective, Cengage Learning, 
2013. 
5. Robert  D.  Hisrich,  Michael  P.  Peters,  Dean  A.  Shepherd,  Sabyasachi  Sinha  (2020). 
Entrepreneurship, McGrawHill, 11th Edition. 
6. NISP -Brochure inside pages - startup_policy_2019.pdf 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS407PC: OPERATING SYSTEMS LAB 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.                     L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Prerequisites: 
   A course on “Programming for Problem Solving”. 
   A course on “Computer Organization and Architecture”. 
Co-requisite: A course on “Operating Systems”. 
 
Course Objectives: 
1.  To  provide  an  understanding  of  the  design  aspects of  operating  system  concepts  through 
simulation. 
2.  Introduce basic Unix commands, system call interface for process management, interprocess 
communication and I/O in Unix. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1.  Simulate  and  implement  operating  system  concepts  such  as  scheduling,  deadlock 
management, file management and memory management. 
2.  Able to implement C programs using Unix system calls. 
 
List of Experiments: 
1.  Write C programs to simulate the following CPU Scheduling algorithms a) FCFS b) SJF c) 
Round Robin d) priority 
2.  Write programs using the I/O system calls of UNIX/LINUX operating system (open, read, write, 
close, lseek, stat, fork, exit) 
3.  Write a C program to simulate Bankers Algorithm for Deadlock Avoidance. 
4.  Write a C program to implement the Producer – Consumer problem using semaphores using 
UNIX/LINUX system calls. 
5.  Write C programs to illustrate the following IPC mechanisms a) Pipes b) FIFOs c) Message 
Queues d) Shared Memory 
6.  Write C programs to simulate the following memory management techniques a) Paging b) 
Segmentation 
7.  Write C programs to simulate Page replacement policies a) FCFS b) LRU c) Optimal 
  
TEXT BOOKS: 
1.   Operating System Principles- Abraham Silberchatz, Peter B. Galvin, Greg Gagne 7
th
 Edition, 
John Wiley. 
2.   Advanced programming in the Unix environment, W. R. Stevens, Pearson education. 
  
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1.  Operating Systems – Internals and Design Principles, William Stallings, Fifth Edition–2005, 
Pearson Education/PHI. 
2.  Operating System - A Design Approach-Crowley, TMH. 
3.  Modern Operating Systems, Andrew S Tanenbaum, 2nd edition, Pearson/PHI. 
4.  UNIX Programming Environment, Kernighan and Pike, PHI/Pearson Education. 
5.  UNIX Internals: The New Frontiers, U. Vahalia, Pearson Education. 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS408PC: COMPUTER NETWORKS LAB 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.                                                                                        L   T  P  C 
                                                                                                                         0   0  2   1 
Course Objectives: 
   To understand the working principle of various communication protocols. 
   To  understand  the  network  simulator  environment  and  visualize  a  network  topology  and 
observe its performance 
   To analyze the traffic flow and the contents of protocol frames 
 
Course Outcomes: 
   Implement data link layer farming methods 
   Analyze error detection and error correction codes. 
   Implement and analyze routing and congestion issues in network design. 
   Implement Encoding and Decoding techniques used in presentation layer 
   To be able to work with different network tools 
 
List of Experiments 
1.  Implement the data link layer framing methods such as character, character-stuffing and bit 
stuffing. 
2.  Write a program to compute CRC code for the polynomials CRC-12, CRC-16 and CRC CCIP 
3.  Develop a simple data link layer that performs the flow control using the sliding window protocol, 
and loss recovery using the Go-Back-N mechanism. 
4.  Implement Dijsktra’s algorithm to compute the shortest path through a network 
5.  Take an example subnet of hosts and obtain a broadcast tree for the subnet. 
6.  Implement distance vector routing algorithm for obtaining routing tables at each node. 
7.  Implement data encryption and data decryption 
8.  Write a program for congestion control using Leaky bucket algorithm. 
9.  Write a program for frame sorting techniques used in buffers. 
10. Wireshark 
i.   Packet Capture Using Wire shark 
ii.   Starting Wire shark 
iii.   Viewing Captured Traffic 
iv.   Analysis and Statistics & Filters. 
1.  How to run Nmap scan 
2.  Operating System Detection using Nmap 
3.  Do the following using NS2 Simulator 
I.    NS2 Simulator-Introduction 
II.    Simulate to Find the Number of Packets Dropped 
III.    Simulate to Find the Number of Packets Dropped by TCP/UDP 
IV.    Simulate to Find the Number of Packets Dropped due to Congestion 
V.    Simulate to Compare Data Rate & Throughput. 
VI.    Simulate to Plot Congestion for Different Source/Destination 
VII.    Simulate to Determine the Performance with respect to Transmission of Packets 
 
TEXT BOOK: 
1.  Computer  Networks,  Andrew  S  Tanenbaum,  David.  j.  Wetherall,  5
th
  Edition.  Pearson 
Education/PHI 
 
REFERENCES: 
1.  An Engineering Approach to Computer Networks, S.Keshav, 2
nd
 Edition, Pearson Education 
2.  Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan. 3rd Edition, TMH. 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS409PC: MACHINE LEARNING LAB 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.          L   T     P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Course Objective:  
   The objective of this lab is to get an overview of the various machine learning techniques and 
can demonstrate them using python. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
   Understand modern notions in predictive data analysis 
   Select data, model selection, model complexity and identify the trends 
   Understand a range of machine learning algorithms along with their strengths and weaknesses  
   Build predictive models from data and analyze their performance  
 
List of Experiments: 
1.  Write  a  python  program  to  compute  Central  Tendency  Measures:  Mean,  Median,  Mode, 
Measure of Dispersion: Variance, Standard Deviation  
2.  Study of Python Basic Libraries such as Statistics, Math, Numpy and Scipy 
3.  Study of Python Libraries for ML application such as Pandas and Matplotlib 
4.  Write a Python program to implement Simple Linear Regression  
5.  Implementation of Multiple Linear Regression for House Price Prediction using sklearn  
6.  Implementation of Decision tree using sklearn and its parameter tuning  
7.  Implementation of KNN using sklearn  
8.  Implementation of Logistic Regression using sklearn  
9.  Implementation of K-Means Clustering 
10. Performance analysis of Classification Algorithms on a specific dataset (Mini Project)  
 
TEXT BOOK: 
1.  Machine Learning – Tom M. Mitchell, - MGH. 
 
REFERENCE BOOK: 
1.  Machine Learning: An Algorithmic Perspective, Stephen Marshland, Taylor & Francis. 
 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
CS410SD: DATA VISUALIZATION - R PROGRAMMING/ POWER BI 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.         L   T    P   C 
0    0    2   1 
Course Objectives: 
   Effective use of Business Intelligence (BI) technology (Tableau) to apply data visualization 
   To discern patterns and relationships in the data. 
   To build Dashboard applications. 
   To communicate the results clearly and concisely. 
   To be able to work with different formats of data sets. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course a student should be able to 
   Understand How to import data into Tableau. 
   Understand Tableau concepts of Dimensions and Measures. 
   Develop Programs and understand how to map Visual Layouts and Graphical Properties. 
   Create a Dashboard that links multiple visualizations. 
   Use graphical user interfaces to create Frames for providing solutions to real world problems. 
 
Lab Problems: 
1.  Understanding  Data,  What  is  data,  where  to  find  data,  Foundations  for  building  Data 
Visualizations, Creating Your First visualization? 
2.  Getting started with Tableau Software using Data file formats, connecting your Data to Tableau, 
creating basic charts(line, bar charts, Tree maps),Using the Show me panel. 
3.  Tableau  Calculations,  Overview  of  SUM,  AVR,  and  Aggregate  features,  Creating  custom 
calculations and fields. 
4.  Applying new data calculations to your visualizations, Formatting Visualizations, Formatting 
Tools and Menus, Formatting specific parts of the view. 
5.  Editing and Formatting Axes, Manipulating Data in Tableau data, Pivoting Tableau data. 
6.  Structuring your data, Sorting and filtering Tableau data, Pivoting Tableau data. 
7.  Advanced Visualization Tools: Using Filters, Using the Detail panel, using the Size panels, 
customizing filters, Using and Customizing tooltips, Formatting your data with colors. 
8.  Creating Dashboards &amp; Storytelling, creating your first dashboard and Story, Design for 
different displays, adding interactivity to your Dashboard, Distributing &amp; Publishing your 
Visualization. 
9.  Tableau  file  types,  publishing  to  Tableau  Online,  Sharing  your  visualizations,  printing,  and 
Exporting. 
10. Creating custom charts, cyclical data and circular area charts, Dual Axis charts. 
 
REFERENCES: 
1.  Microsoft Power BI cookbook, Brett Powell, 2nd edition.  
2.  R Programming for Data Science by Roger D. Peng (References) 
3.  The Art of R Programming by Norman Matloff Cengage Learning India. 
 
  

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
VA400HS: INDIAN KNOWLEDGE SYSTEM 
 
B.Tech. II Year II Sem.         L   T    P   C 
1    0    0   1 
 
Bharat is considered one of the oldest civilizations of the world. Some of the archaeological evidences 
proved  the  existence  of  Indus  Valley  Civilization  in  7000  B.C.  Bhartiya  traditions,  culture,  cultural 
activities, rituals, sacraments, painting, art of dancing, art  of singing etc.  is being practised till the 
modern times without knowing scientific approaches behind that. Eternity of Indian knowledge system 
proved  itself that  not  only  many  rituals  but  also  many  traditions,  many  streams  of knowledge  like 
astrology, mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, language studies, yoga and meditation had been 
following from the starting till now with some changes, in the form of traditions.    
 
This course is for undergraduate students to inculcate Indian values. It will promote advance study and 
inter disciplinary research on all aspects of the Indian knowledge system. 
 
Course Objectives: This course aims: 
1.  To provide a tribune of the rich culture and traditions of Indian knowledge system to students 
of various disciplines. 
2.  To introduce historical account on the education and scientific literature available in ancient 
Indian traditions and its connections with ancient Indian Philosophy 
3.  To give insights about the applications of Bharatiya Jnana Parampara 
4.  To introduce Indian approach towards health and wellbeing  
5.  To  elaborate  vast  contribution  of  ancient  Indian  researchers,  engineers,  scientists  and 
architects to the modern world 
  
Course Outcomes: Students will be able to:  
1.  Understand nature, scope and related fields of Indian knowledge system. 
2.  Demonstrate the scientific literature available in ancient Indian traditions 
3.  Understanding the application of Bharatiya Jnana Parampara  
4.  Understand Indian approach towards Wellbeing 
5.  Appreciate vast contribution of ancient Indian researchers, engineers, scientists and architects 
to the modern world 
 
Unit 1: Introduction to Indian Knowledge Systems 
Meaning, Nature, Scope and Salient Aspects of Bharatiya Jnana Parampara - Introduction to Vedas, 
Upanishads, Vidya, Kala, Jnana, Shastra - Practices and Continuity of Tradition 
 
Unit 2: Overview of History of Indian Education and Scientific Literature 
Gurukul  System  -  Role  of  Sanskrit  in  Natural  Language  Processing  -  Scientific  Literature  -  Vedic 
Literature - Available Scientific Treatises - Interlinkings  
 
 
Unit 3: Introduction to Scientific Theories from Pure Sciences from Ancient Indian Knowledge 
Systems 
Overview  of  theories  from  available  ancient  Indian  Literature  about  Physics,  Chemistry  and 
Mathematics - Interlinkings and applications  
 
Unit 4: Introduction to Ancient Indian Wellness Systems 
Concept of Wellness – Yoga System - Ayurveda System - Ancient Indian Aesthetics 
 
Unit 5: Development of Engineering, Science, Technology & Fine Arts in India 

R25 B.Tech CSE (AI&ML) Syllabus   JNTU Hyderabad 
 
Various Industries - Silk, Cotton and Ship Building - Evolution of Indian Fine Arts – Cave and Temple 
Architecture, Vastu - Vidya, Sculpture, Forts and Stepwells, Observatories and Paintings - Music and 
Natyakala - Cultural Traditions & Folk Arts 
 
 Pedagogy  for  Teachers:  Apart  from  Class  Room  Instruction,  the  following  Methods  are 
Suggested. 
 
1.  Project based activities and learning. 
2.  Presentation and case studies. 
3.  Film screening and book reviews. 
4.  Visit to historical places, archives centre, research centre or library nearby. 
 
Note: Activities mentioned above are only suggestive. Teacher-educators should encourage students 
to be innovative. 
 
Suggested Readings: 
1.  B.  Mahadevan,  Bhat  Vinayak  and  Nagendra  Pavan  R.N.,  (2022)  'Introduction  to  Indian 
Knowledge  Systems:  Concepts  and  Applications'  PHI  learning  PVT,  New  Delhi  ISBN 
[9789391818203] 
2.  Dharmapal (1971) 'Indian Science and Technology in the Eighteenth Century'. Other India 
Press, Goa. 
3.  Kapil Kapoor, Singh Avdhesh Kumar, (2005) 'Indian Knowledge Systems' D.K. Printworld (P) 
Ltd. ISBN 10: 8124603367 / ISBN 13: 9788124603369 
4.  Chakradeo, Ujwala, Temples of Bharat, Aayu Publications, New Delhi, 2024. 
5.  D.N. Bose, S.N. Sen and B. V. Subbarayappa, A Concise History of Science in India, Indian 
National Science Academy, New Delhi, 2009. 
6.  Datta B. and A. N. Singh, History of Hindu Mathematics: Parts I and II, Asia Publishing House, 
Bombay, 1962. 
7.  Kapoor,  K.  (2021), Indian  Knowledge  System:  Nature,  Philosophy,  Character  in  Indian 
Knowledge System, vol. 1, Pub. Indian Institute of Advanced Studies, Shimla 
8.  Mahadevan, B., Bhat, V.R., Pavana, N. (2022), Philosophical Systems, in Introduction to Indian 
Knowledge System, Pub. PHI Learning, New Delhi. 
9.  Mahadevan, B., Bhat, V.R., Pavana, N. (2022), Knowledge: Framework and Classification, in 
Introduction to Indian Knowledge System, Pub. PHI Learning, New Delhi. 
 
Video Resources: 
1.  Introductory lectures by Prof. Gauri Mahulikar 
2.  Introductory lectures by Prof. Kapil Kapoor 
 
Websites: 
   https://iksin dia.org/index.php 
   Official Website of IKS- Indian Knowledge System 
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uKcf-hSlcUE 
   Address by Prof Kapil Kapoor | Indian Institute of Advanced Study (FDP 2021) 
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MDJTXNiH2_A 
   Mukul Kanitkar on Bharatiya Knowledge System 
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uARMhv97pjk 
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oTwgf56GbsA 
   Scientific History of India | Mukul Kanitkar Lecture in DTU 
   https://youtu.be/gNJNmPJqXJc?si=WFBbuUT65mLZzpOW 
   Ancient India's Scientific Achievements & Contribution in Mathematics, Astronomy, Science & 
Medicine 